## CHAPTER THE FOURTH. THE NEW PHASE

### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
63


### Section 1

The task that lay before the Assembly of Brissago, viewed as we may view it now from the clarifying standpointof things accomplished, was in its broad issues a simple one. Essentially it was to place social organisation uponthe new footing that the swift, accelerated advance of human knowledge had rendered necessary. The council wasgathered together with the haste of a salvage expedition, and it was confronted with wreckage; but the wreckagewas irreparable wreckage, and the only possibilities of the case were either the relapse of mankind to theagricultural barbarism from which it had emerged so painfully or the acceptance of achieved science as the basisof a new social order. The old tendencies of human nature, suspicion, jealousy, particularism, and belligerency,were incompatible with the monstrous destructive power of the new appliances the inhuman logic of science hadproduced. The equilibrium could be restored only by civilisation destroying itself down to a level at whichmodern apparatus could no longer be produced, or by human nature adapting itself in its institutions to the newconditions. It was for the latter alternative that the assembly existed.
Sooner or later this choice would have confronted mankind. The sudden development of atomic science did butprecipitate and render rapid and dramatic a clash between the new and the customary that had been gatheringsince ever the first flint was chipped or the first fire built together. From the day when man contrived himself atool and suffered another male to draw near him, he ceased to be altogether a thing of instinct and untroubledconvictions. From that day forth a widening breach can be traced between his egotistical passions and the socialneed. Slowly he adapted himself to the life of the homestead, and his passionate impulses widened out to thedemands of the clan and the tribe. But widen though his impulses might, the latent hunter and wanderer andwonderer in his imagination outstripped their development. He was never quite subdued to the soil nor quitetamed to the home. Everywhere it needed teaching and the priest to keep him within the bounds of the plough−lifeand the beast−tending. Slowly a vast system of traditional imperatives superposed itself upon his instincts,imperatives that were admirably fitted to make him that cultivator, that cattle−mincer, who was for twice tenthousand years the normal man.
And, unpremeditated, undesired, out of the accumulations of his tilling came civilisation. Civilisation was theagricultural surplus. It appeared as trade and tracks and roads, it pushed boats out upon the rivers and presentlyinvaded the seas, and within its primitive courts, within temples grown rich and leisurely and amidst the gatheringmedley of the seaport towns rose speculation and philosophy and science, and the beginning of the new order thathas at last established itself as human life. Slowly at first, as we traced it, and then with an accumulating velocity,the new powers were fabricated. Man as a whole did not seek them nor desire them; they were thrust into hishand. For a time men took up and used these new things and the new powers inadvertently as they came to him,recking nothing of the consequences. For endless generations change led him very gently. But when he had beenled far enough, change quickened the pace. It was with a series of shocks that he realised at last that he was livingthe old life less and less and a new life more and more.
Already before the release of atomic energy the tensions between the old way of living and the new were intense.They were far intenser than they had been even at the collapse of the Roman imperial system. On the one handwas the ancient life of the family and the small community and the petty industry, on the other was a new life on alarger scale, with remoter horizons and a strange sense of purpose. Already it was growing clear that men mustlive on one side or the other. One could not have little tradespeople and syndicated businesses in the same market,sleeping carters and motor trolleys on the same road, bows and arrows and aeroplane sharpshooters in the samearmy, or illiterate peasant industries and power−driven factories in the same world. And still less it was possiblethat one could have the ideas and ambitions and greed and jealousy of peasants equipped with the vast appliancesof the new age. If there had been no atomic bombs to bring together most of the directing intelligence of the worldto that hasty conference at Brissago, there would still have been, extended over great areas and a considerablespace of time perhaps, a less formal conference of responsible and understanding people upon the perplexities ofthis world−wide opposition. If the work of Holsten had been spread over centuries and imparted to the world byimperceptible degrees, it would nevertheless have made it necessary for men to take counsel upon and set a plan
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
64


for the future. Indeed already there had been accumulating for a hundred years before the crisis a literature offoresight; there was a whole mass of 'Modern State' scheming available for the conference to go upon. Thesebombs did but accentuate and dramatise an already developing problem.
### Section 2

This assembly was no leap of exceptional minds and super−intelligences into the control of affairs. It wasteachable, its members trailed ideas with them to the gathering, but these were the consequences of the 'moralshock' the bombs had given humanity, and there is no reason for supposing its individual personalities weregreatly above the average. It would be possible to cite a thousand instances of error and inefficiency in itsproceedings due to the forgetfulness, irritability, or fatigue of its members. It experimented considerably andblundered often. Excepting Holsten, whose gift was highly specialised, it is questionable whether there was asingle man of the first order of human quality in the gathering. But it had a modest fear of itself, and a consequentdirectness that gave it a general distinction. There was, of course, a noble simplicity about Leblanc, but even ofhim it may be asked whether he was not rather good and honest−minded than in the fuller sense great.
The ex−king had wisdom and a certain romantic dash, he was a man among thousands, even if he was not a manamong millions, but his memoirs, and indeed his decision to write memoirs, give the quality of himself and hisassociates. The book makes admirable but astonishing reading. Therein he takes the great work the council wasdoing for granted as a little child takes God. It is as if he had no sense of it at all. He tells amusing trivialitiesabout his cousin Wilhelm and his secretary Firmin, he pokes fun at the American president, who was, indeed,rather a little accident of the political machine than a representative American, and he gives a long description ofhow he was lost for three days in the mountains in the company of the only Japanese member, a loss that seems tohave caused no serious interruption of the work of the council....
The Brissago conference has been written about time after time, as though it were a gathering of the very flowerof humanity. Perched up there by the freak or wisdom of Leblanc, it had a certain Olympian quality, and thenatural tendency of the human mind to elaborate such a resemblance would have us give its members thelikenesses of gods. It would be equally reasonable to compare it to one of those enforced meetings upon themountain−tops that must have occurred in the opening phases of the Deluge. The strength of the council lay not initself but in the circumstances that had quickened its intelligence, dispelled its vanities, and emancipated it fromtraditional ambitions and antagonisms. It was stripped of the accumulation of centuries, a naked government withall that freedom of action that nakedness affords. And its problems were set before it with a plainness that was outof all comparison with the complicated and perplexing intimations of the former time.
### Section 3

The world on which the council looked did indeed present a task quite sufficiently immense and altogether toourgent for any wanton indulgence in internal dissension. It may be interesting to sketch in a few phrases thecondition of mankind at the close of the period of warring states, in the year of crisis that followed the release ofatomic power. It was a world extraordinarily limited when one measures it by later standards, and it was now in astate of the direst confusion and distress.
It must be remembered that at this time men had still to spread into enormous areas of the land surface of theglobe. There were vast mountain wildernesses, forest wildernesses, sandy deserts, and frozen lands. Men stillclung closely to water and arable soil in temperate or sub−tropical climates, they lived abundantly only in rivervalleys, and all their great cities had grown upon large navigable rivers or close to ports upon the sea. Over greatareas even of this suitable land flies and mosquitoes, armed with infection, had so far defeated human invasion,and under their protection the virgin forests remained untouched. Indeed, the whole world even in its mostcrowded districts was filthy with flies and swarming with needless insect life to an extent which is now almostincredible. A population map of the world in 1950 would have followed seashore and river course so closely in its
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
65


darker shading as to give an impression that homo sapiens was an amphibious animal. His roads and railways layalso along the lower contours, only here and there to pierce some mountain barrier or reach some holiday resortdid they clamber above 3000 feet. And across the ocean his traffic passed in definite lines; there were hundreds ofthousands of square miles of ocean no ship ever traversed except by mischance.
Into the mysteries of the solid globe under his feet he had not yet pierced for five miles, and it was still not fortyyears since, with a tragic pertinacity, he had clambered to the poles of the earth. The limitless mineral wealth ofthe Arctic and Antarctic circles was still buried beneath vast accumulations of immemorial ice, and the secretriches of the inner zones of the crust were untapped and indeed unsuspected. The higher mountain regions wereknown only to a sprinkling of guide−led climbers and the frequenters of a few gaunt hotels, and the vast rainlessbelts of land that lay across the continental masses, from Gobi to Sahara and along the backbone of America, withtheir perfect air, their daily baths of blazing sunshine, their nights of cool serenity and glowing stars, and theirreservoirs of deep−lying water, were as yet only desolations of fear and death to the common imagination.
And now under the shock of the atomic bombs, the great masses of population which had gathered into theenormous dingy town centres of that period were dispossessed and scattered disastrously over the surroundingrural areas. It was as if some brutal force, grown impatient at last at man's blindness, had with the deliberateintention of a rearrangement of population upon more wholesome lines, shaken the world. The great industrialregions and the large cities that had escaped the bombs were, because of their complete economic collapse, inalmost as tragic plight as those that blazed, and the country−side was disordered by a multitude of wandering andlawless strangers. In some parts of the world famine raged, and in many regions there was plague.... The plains ofnorth India, which had become more and more dependent for the general welfare on the railways and that greatsystem of irrigation canals which the malignant section of the patriots had destroyed, were in a state of peculiardistress, whole villages lay dead together, no man heeding, and the very tigers and panthers that preyed upon theemaciated survivors crawled back infected into the jungle to perish. Large areas of China were a prey to brigandbands....
It is a remarkable thing that no complete contemporary account of the explosion of the atomic bombs survives.There are, of course, innumerable allusions and partial records, and it is from these that subsequent ages mustpiece together the image of these devastations.
The phenomena, it must be remembered, changed greatly from day to day, and even from hour to hour, as theexploding bomb shifted its position, threw off fragments or came into contact with water or a fresh texture of soil.Barnet, who came within forty miles of Paris early in October, is concerned chiefly with his account of the socialconfusion of the country−side and the problems of his command, but he speaks of heaped cloud masses of steam.'All along the sky to the south−west' and of a red glare beneath these at night. Parts of Paris were still burning, andnumbers of people were camped in the fields even at this distance watching over treasured heaps of salvaged loot.He speaks too of the distant rumbling of the explosion−−'like trains going over iron bridges.'
Other descriptions agree with this; they all speak of the 'continuous reverberations,' or of the 'thudding andhammering,' or some such phrase; and they all testify to a huge pall of steam, from which rain would fall suddenlyin torrents and amidst which lightning played. Drawing nearer to Paris an observer would have found the salvagecamps increasing in number and blocking up the villages, and large numbers of people, often starving and ailing,camping under improvised tents because there was no place for them to go. The sky became more and moredensely overcast until at last it blotted out the light of day and left nothing but a dull red glare 'extraordinarilydepressing to the spirit.' In this dull glare, great numbers of people were still living, clinging to their houses and inmany cases subsisting in a state of partial famine upon the produce in their gardens and the stores in the shops ofthe provision dealers.
Coming in still closer, the investigator would have reached the police cordon, which was trying to check thedesperate enterprise of those who would return to their homes or rescue their more valuable possessions within
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
66


the 'zone of imminent danger.'
That zone was rather arbitrarily defined. If our spectator could have got permission to enter it, he would haveentered also a zone of uproar, a zone of perpetual thunderings, lit by a strange purplish−red light, and quiveringand swaying with the incessant explosion of the radio−active substance. Whole blocks of buildings were alightand burning fiercely, the trembling, ragged flames looking pale and ghastly and attenuated in comparison with thefull−bodied crimson glare beyond. The shells of other edifices already burnt rose, pierced by rows of windowsockets against the red−lit mist.
Every step farther would have been as dangerous as a descent within the crater of an active volcano. Thesespinning, boiling bomb centres would shift or break unexpectedly into new regions, great fragments of earth ordrain or masonry suddenly caught by a jet of disruptive force might come flying by the explorer's head, or theground yawn a fiery grave beneath his feet. Few who adventured into these areas of destruction and survivedattempted any repetition of their experiences. There are stories of puffs of luminous, radio−active vapour driftingsometimes scores of miles from the bomb centre and killing and scorching all they overtook. And the firstconflagrations from the Paris centre spread westward half−way to the sea.
Moreover, the air in this infernal inner circle of red−lit ruins had a peculiar dryness and a blistering quality, sothat it set up a soreness of the skin and lungs that was very difficult to heal....
Such was the last state of Paris, and such on a larger scale was the condition of affairs in Chicago, and the samefate had overtaken Berlin, Moscow, Tokio, the eastern half of London, Toulon, Kiel, and two hundred andeighteen other centres of population or armament. Each was a flaming centre of radiant destruction that only timecould quench, that indeed in many instances time has still to quench. To this day, though indeed with a constantlydiminishing uproar and vigour, these explosions continue. In the map of nearly every country of the world threeor four or more red circles, a score of miles in diameter, mark the position of the dying atomic bombs and thedeath areas that men have been forced to abandon around them. Within these areas perished museums, cathedrals,palaces, libraries, galleries of masterpieces, and a vast accumulation of human achievement, whose charredremains lie buried, a legacy of curious material that only future generations may hope to examine....
### Section 4

The state of mind of the dispossessed urban population which swarmed and perished so abundantly over thecountry−side during the dark days of the autumnal months that followed the Last War, was one of blank despair.Barnet gives sketch after sketch of groups of these people, camped among the vineyards of Champagne, as he sawthem during his period of service with the army of pacification.
There was, for example, that 'man−milliner' who came out from a field beside the road that rises up eastward outof Epernay, and asked how things were going in Paris. He was, says Barnet, a round−faced man, dressed veryneatly in black−−so neatly that it was amazing to discover he was living close at hand in a tent made ofcarpets−−and he had 'an urbane but insistent manner,' a carefully trimmed moustache and beard, expressiveeyebrows, and hair very neatly brushed.
'No one goes into Paris,' said Barnet.
'But, Monsieur, that is very unenterprising,' the man by the wayside submitted.
'The danger is too great. The radiations eat into people's skins.'
The eyebrows protested. 'But is nothing to be done?'
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
67


'Nothing can be done.'
'But, Monsieur, it is extraordinarily inconvenient, this living in exile and waiting. My wife and my little boy sufferextremely. There is a lack of amenity. And the season advances. I say nothing of the expense and difficulty inobtaining provisions. . . . When does Monsieur think that something will be done to render Paris−−possible?'
Barnet considered his interlocutor.
'I'm told,' said Barnet, 'that Paris is not likely to be possible again for several generations.'
'Oh! but this is preposterous! Consider, Monsieur! What are people like ourselves to do in the meanwhile? I am acostumier. All my connections and interests, above all my style, demand Paris. . . .'
Barnet considered the sky, from which a light rain was beginning to fall, the wide fields about them from whichthe harvest had been taken, the trimmed poplars by the wayside.
'Naturally,' he agreed, 'you want to go to Paris. But Paris is over.'
### 'Over!'

### 'Finished.'

'But then, Monsieur−−what is to become−−of ME?'
Barnet turned his face westward, whither the white road led.
'Where else, for example, may I hope to find−−opportunity?'
Barnet made no reply.
'Perhaps on the Riviera. Or at some such place as Homburg. Or some plague perhaps.'
'All that,' said Barnet, accepting for the first time facts that had lain evident in his mind for weeks; 'all that must beover, too.'
There was a pause. Then the voice beside him broke out. 'But, Monsieur, it is impossible! It leaves−−nothing.'
'No. Not very much.'
'One cannot suddenly begin to grow potatoes!'
'It would be good if Monsieur could bring himself−−−−'
'To the life of a peasant! And my wife−−−−You do not know the distinguished delicacy of my wife, a refinedhelplessness, a peculiar dependent charm. Like some slender tropical creeper−−with great white flowers.... But allthis is foolish talk. It is impossible that Paris, which has survived so many misfortunes, should not presentlyrevive.'
'I do not think it will ever revive. Paris is finished. London, too, I am told−−Berlin. All the great capitals werestricken....'
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
68


'But−−−−! Monsieur must permit me to differ.'
'It is so.'
'It is impossible. Civilisations do not end in this manner. Mankind will insist.'
### 'On Paris?'

### 'On Paris.'

'Monsieur, you might as well hope to go down the Maelstrom and resume business there.'
'I am content, Monsieur, with my own faith.'
'The winter comes on. Would not Monsieur be wiser to seek a house?'
'Farther from Paris? No, Monsieur. But it is not possible, Monsieur, what you say, and you are under atremendous mistake.... Indeed you are in error.... I asked merely for information....'
'When last I saw him,' said Barnet, 'he was standing under the signpost at the crest of the hill, gazing wistfully, yetit seemed to me a little doubtfully, now towards Paris, and altogether heedless of a drizzling rain that was wettinghim through and through....'
### Section 5

This effect of chill dismay, of a doom as yet imperfectly apprehended deepens as Barnet's record passes on to tellof the approach of winter. It was too much for the great mass of those unwilling and incompetent nomads torealise that an age had ended, that the old help and guidance existed no longer, that times would not mend again,however patiently they held out. They were still in many cases looking to Paris when the first snowflakes of thatpitiless January came swirling about them. The story grows grimmer....
If it is less monstrously tragic after Barnet's return to England, it is, if anything, harder. England was a spectacleof fear−embittered householders, hiding food, crushing out robbery, driving the starving wanderers from everyfaltering place upon the roads lest they should die inconveniently and reproachfully on the doorsteps of those whohad failed to urge them onward....
The remnants of the British troops left France finally in March, after urgent representations from the provisionalgovernment at Orleans that they could be supported no longer. They seem to have been a fairly well−behaved, buthighly parasitic force throughout, though Barnet is clearly of opinion that they did much to suppress sporadicbrigandage and maintain social order. He came home to a famine−stricken country, and his picture of the Englandof that spring is one of miserable patience and desperate expedients. The country was suffering much more thanFrance, because of the cessation of the overseas supplies on which it had hitherto relied. His troops were givenbread, dried fish, and boiled nettles at Dover, and marched inland to Ashford and paid off. On the way thither theysaw four men hanging from the telegraph posts by the roadside, who had been hung for stealing swedes. Thelabour refuges of Kent, he discovered, were feeding their crowds of casual wanderers on bread into which clayand sawdust had been mixed. In Surrey there was a shortage of even such fare as that. He himself struck acrosscountry to Winchester, fearing to approach the bomb−poisoned district round London, and at Winchester he hadthe luck to be taken on as one of the wireless assistants at the central station and given regular rations. The stationstood in a commanding position on the chalk hill that overlooks the town from the east....
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
69


Thence he must have assisted in the transmission of the endless cipher messages that preceded the gathering atBrissago, and there it was that the Brissago proclamation of the end of the war and the establishment of a worldgovernment came under his hands.
He was feeling ill and apathetic that day, and he did not realise what it was he was transcribing. He did itmechanically, as a part of his tedious duty.
Afterwards there came a rush of messages arising out of the declaration that strained him very much, and in theevening when he was relieved, he ate his scanty supper and then went out upon the little balcony before thestation, to smoke and rest his brains after this sudden and as yet inexplicable press of duty. It was a very beautiful,still evening. He fell talking to a fellow operator, and for the first time, he declares, 'I began to understand what itwas all about. I began to see just what enormous issues had been under my hands for the past four hours. But Ibecame incredulous after my first stimulation. "This is some sort of Bunkum," I said very sagely.
'My colleague was more hopeful. "It means an end to bomb−throwing and destruction," he said. "It means thatpresently corn will come from America."
' "Who is going to send corn when there is no more value in money?" I asked.
'Suddenly we were startled by a clashing from the town below. The cathedral bells, which had been silent eversince I had come into the district, were beginning, with a sort of rheumatic difficulty, to ring. Presently theywarmed a little to the work, and we realised what was going on. They were ringing a peal. We listened with anunbelieving astonishment and looking into each other's yellow faces.
' "They mean it," said my colleague.
' "But what can they do now?" I asked. "Everything is broken down...." '
And on that sentence, with an unexpected artistry, Barnet abruptly ends his story.
### Section 6

From the first the new government handled affairs with a certain greatness of spirit. Indeed, it was inevitable thatthey should act greatly. From the first they had to see the round globe as one problem; it was impossible anylonger to deal with it piece by piece. They had to secure it universally from any fresh outbreak of atomicdestruction, and they had to ensure a permanent and universal pacification. On this capacity to grasp and wield thewhole round globe their existence depended. There was no scope for any further performance.
So soon as the seizure of the existing supplies of atomic ammunition and the apparatus for synthesisingCarolinum was assured, the disbanding or social utilisation of the various masses of troops still under arms had tobe arranged, the salvation of the year's harvests, and the feeding, housing, and employment of the drifting millionsof homeless people. In Canada, in South America, and Asiatic Russia there were vast accumulations of provisionthat was immovable only because of the breakdown of the monetary and credit systems. These had to be broughtinto the famine districts very speedily if entire depopulation was to be avoided, and their transportation and therevival of communications generally absorbed a certain proportion of the soldiery and more able unemployed.The task of housing assumed gigantic dimensions, and from building camps the housing committee of the councilspeedily passed to constructions of a more permanent type. They found far less friction than might have beenexpected in turning the loose population on their hands to these things. People were extraordinarily tamed by thatyear of suffering and death; they were disillusioned of their traditions, bereft of once obstinate prejudices; theyfelt foreign in a strange world, and ready to follow any confident leadership. The orders of the new governmentcame with the best of all credentials, rations. The people everywhere were as easy to control, one of the old labour
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
70


experts who had survived until the new time witnesses, 'as gangs of emigrant workers in a new land.' And now itwas that the social possibilities of the atomic energy began to appear. The new machinery that had come intoexistence before the last wars increased and multiplied, and the council found itself not only with millions ofhands at its disposal but with power and apparatus that made its first conceptions of the work it had to do seempitifully timid. The camps that were planned in iron and deal were built in stone and brass; the roads that were tohave been mere iron tracks became spacious ways that insisted upon architecture; the cultivations of foodstuffsthat were to have supplied emergency rations, were presently, with synthesisers, fertilisers, actinic light, andscientific direction, in excess of every human need.
The government had begun with the idea of temporarily reconstituting the social and economic system that hadprevailed before the first coming of the atomic engine, because it was to this system that the ideas and habits ofthe great mass of the world's dispossessed population was adapted. Subsequent rearrangement it had hoped toleave to its successors−−whoever they might be. But this, it became more and more manifest, was absolutelyimpossible. As well might the council have proposed a revival of slavery. The capitalist system had already beensmashed beyond repair by the onset of limitless gold and energy; it fell to pieces at the first endeavour to stand itup again. Already before the war half of the industrial class had been out of work, the attempt to put them backinto wages employment on the old lines was futile from the outset−−the absolute shattering of the currencysystem alone would have been sufficient to prevent that, and it was necessary therefore to take over the housing,feeding, and clothing of this worldwide multitude without exacting any return in labour whatever. In a little whilethe mere absence of occupation for so great a multitude of people everywhere became an evident social danger,and the government was obliged to resort to such devices as simple decorative work in wood and stone, themanufacture of hand−woven textiles, fruit−growing, flower−growing, and landscape gardening on a grand scaleto keep the less adaptable out of mischief, and of paying wages to the younger adults for attendance at schoolsthat would equip them to use the new atomic machinery.... So quite insensibly the council drifted into a completereorganisation of urban and industrial life, and indeed of the entire social system.
Ideas that are unhampered by political intrigue or financial considerations have a sweeping way with them, andbefore a year was out the records of the council show clearly that it was rising to its enormous opportunity, andpartly through its own direct control and partly through a series of specific committees, it was planning a newcommon social order for the entire population of the earth. 'There can be no real social stability or any generalhuman happiness while large areas of the world and large classes of people are in a phase of civilisation differentfrom the prevailing mass. It is impossible now to have great blocks of population misunderstanding the generallyaccepted social purpose or at an economic disadvantage to the rest.' So the council expressed its conception of theproblem it had to solve. The peasant, the field−worker, and all barbaric cultivators were at an 'economicdisadvantage' to the more mobile and educated classes, and the logic of the situation compelled the council to takeup systematically the supersession of this stratum by a more efficient organisation of production. It developed ascheme for the progressive establishment throughout the world of the 'modern system' in agriculture, a system thatshould give the full advantages of a civilised life to every agricultural worker, and this replacement has beengoing on right up to the present day. The central idea of the modern system is the substitution of cultivating guildsfor the individual cultivator, and for cottage and village life altogether. These guilds are associations of men andwomen who take over areas of arable or pasture land, and make themselves responsible for a certain averageproduce. They are bodies small enough as a rule to be run on a strictly democratic basis, and large enough tosupply all the labour, except for a certain assistance from townspeople during the harvest, needed upon the landfarmed. They have watchers' bungalows or chalets on the ground cultivated, but the ease and the costlessness ofmodern locomotion enables them to maintain a group of residences in the nearest town with a commondining−room and club house, and usually also a guild house in the national or provincial capital. Already thissystem has abolished a distinctively 'rustic' population throughout vast areas of the old world, where it hasprevailed immemorially. That shy, unstimulated life of the lonely hovel, the narrow scandals and petty spites andpersecutions of the small village, that hoarding, half inanimate existence away from books, thought, or socialparticipation and in constant contact with cattle, pigs, poultry, and their excrement, is passing away out of humanexperience. In a little while it will be gone altogether. In the nineteenth century it had already ceased to be a
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
71


necessary human state, and only the absence of any collective intelligence and an imagined need for tough andunintelligent soldiers and for a prolific class at a low level, prevented its systematic replacement at that time....
And while this settlement of the country was in progress, the urban camps of the first phase of the council'sactivities were rapidly developing, partly through the inherent forces of the situation and partly through thecouncil's direction, into a modern type of town....
### Section 7

It is characteristic of the manner in which large enterprises forced themselves upon the Brissago council, that itwas not until the end of the first year of their administration and then only with extreme reluctance that theywould take up the manifest need for a lingua franca for the world. They seem to have given little attention to thevarious theoretical universal languages which were proposed to them. They wished to give as little trouble tohasty and simple people as possible, and the world−wide alstribution of English gave them a bias for it from thebeginning. The extreme simplicity of its grammar was also in its favour.
It was not without some sacrifices that the English−speaking peoples were permitted the satisfaction of hearingtheir speech used universally. The language was shorn of a number of grammatical peculiarities, the distinctiveforms for the subjunctive mood for example and most of its irregular plurals were abolished; its spelling wassystematised and adapted to the vowel sounds in use upon the continent of Europe, and a process of incorporatingforeign nouns and verbs commenced that speedily reached enormous proportions. Within ten years from theestablishment of the World Republic the New English Dictionary had swelled to include a vocabulary of 250,000words, and a man of 1900 would have found considerable difficulty in reading an ordinary newspaper. On theother hand, the men of the new time could still appreciate the older English literature.... Certain minor acts ofuniformity accompanied this larger one. The idea of a common understanding and a general simplification ofintercourse once it was accepted led very naturally to the universal establishment of the metric system of weightsand measures, and to the disappearance of the various makeshift calendars that had hitherto confused chronology.The year was divided into thirteen months of four weeks each, and New Year's Day and Leap Year's Day weremade holidays, and did not count at all in the ordinary week. So the weeks and the months were brought intocorrespondence. And moreover, as the king put it to Firmin, it was decided to 'nail down Easter.' . . . In thesematters, as in so many matters, the new civilisation came as a simplification of ancient complications; the historyof the calendar throughout the world is a history of inadequate adjustments, of attempts to fix seed−time andmidwinter that go back into the very beginning of human society; and this final rectification had a symbolic valuequite beyond its practical convenience. But the council would have no rash nor harsh innovations, no strangenames for the months, and no alteration in the numbering of the years.
The world had already been put upon one universal monetary basis. For some months after the accession of thecouncil, the world's affairs had been carried on without any sound currency at all. Over great regions money wasstill in use, but with the most extravagant variations in price and the most disconcerting fluctuations of publicconfidence. The ancient rarity of gold upon which the entire system rested was gone. Gold was now a wasteproduct in the release of atomic energy, and it was plain that no metal could be the basis of the monetary systemagain. Henceforth all coins must be token coins. Yet the whole world was accustomed to metallic money, and avast proportion of existing human relationships had grown up upon a cash basis, and were almost inconceivablewithout that convenient liquidating factor. It seemed absolutely necessary to the life of the social organisation tohave some sort of currency, and the council had therefore to discover some real value upon which to rest it.Various such apparently stable values as land and hours of work were considered. Ultimately the government,which was now in possession of most of the supplies of energy−releasing material, fixed a certain number of unitsof energy as the value of a gold sovereign, declared a sovereign to be worth exactly twenty marks, twenty−fivefrancs, five dollars, and so forth, with the other current units of the world, and undertook, under variousqualifications and conditions, to deliver energy upon demand as payment for every sovereign presented. On thewhole, this worked satisfactorily. They saved the face of the pound sterling. Coin was rehabilitated, and after a
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
72


phase of price fluctuations, began to settle down to definite equivalents and uses again, with names and everydayvalues familiar to the common run of people....
### Section 8

As the Brissago council came to realise that what it had supposed to be temporary camps of refugees were rapidlydeveloping into great towns of a new type, and that it was remoulding the world in spite of itself, it decided toplace this work of redistributing the non−agricultural population in the hands of a compactor and better qualifiedspecial committee. That committee is now, far more than the council of any other of its delegated committees, theactive government of the world. Developed from an almost invisible germ of 'town−planning' that came obscurelyinto existence in Europe or America (the question is still in dispute) somewhere in the closing decades of thenineteenth century, its work, the continual active planning and replanning of the world as a place of humanhabitation, is now so to speak the collective material activity of the race. The spontaneous, disorderly spreadingsand recessions of populations, as aimless and mechanical as the trickling of spilt water, which was the substanceof history for endless years, giving rise here to congestions, here to chronic devastating wars, and everywhere to adiscomfort and disorderliness that was at its best only picturesque, is at an end. Men spread now, with the wholepower of the race to aid them, into every available region of the earth. Their cities are no longer tethered torunning water and the proximity of cultivation, their plans are no longer affected by strategic considerations orthoughts of social insecurity. The aeroplane and the nearly costless mobile car have abolished trade routes; acommon language and a universal law have abolished a thousand restraining inconveniences, and so anastonishing dispersal of habitations has begun. One may live anywhere. And so it is that our cities now are truesocial gatherings, each with a character of its own and distinctive interests of its own, and most of them with acommon occupation. They lie out in the former deserts, these long wasted sun−baths of the race, they toweramidst eternal snows, they hide in remote islands, and bask on broad lagoons. For a time the whole tendency ofmankind was to desert the river valleys in which the race had been cradled for half a million years, but now thatthe War against Flies has been waged so successfully that this pestilential branch of life is nearly extinct, they arereturning thither with a renewed appetite for gardens laced by watercourses, for pleasant living amidst islands andhouseboats and bridges, and for nocturnal lanterns reflected by the sea.
Man who is ceasing to be an agricultural animal becomes more and more a builder, a traveller, and a maker. Howmuch he ceases to be a cultivator of the soil the returns of the Redistribution Committee showed. Every year thework of our scientific laboratories increases the productivity and simplifies the labour of those who work upon thesoil, and the food now of the whole world is produced by less than one per cent. of its population, a percentagewhich still tends to decrease. Far fewer people are needed upon the land than training and proclivity disposetowards it, and as a consequence of this excess of human attention, the garden side of life, the creation of grovesand lawns and vast regions of beautiful flowers, has expanded enormously and continues to expand. For, asagricultural method intensifies and the quota is raised, one farm association after another, availing itself of the1975 regulations, elects to produce a public garden and pleasaunce in the place of its former fields, and the area offreedom and beauty is increased. And the chemists' triumphs of synthesis, which could now give us an entirelyartificial food, remain largely in abeyance because it is so much more pleasant and interesting to eat naturalproduce and to grow such things upon the soil. Each year adds to the variety of our fruits and the delightfulness ofour flowers.
### Section 9

The early years of the World Republic witnessed a certain recrudescence of political adventure. There was, it israther curious to note, no revival of separatism after the face of King Ferdinand Charles had vanished from thesight of men, but in a number of countries, as the first urgent physical needs were met, there appeared a variety ofpersonalities having this in common, that they sought to revive political trouble and clamber by its aid to positionsof importance and satisfaction. In no case did they speak in the name of kings, and it is clear that monarchy musthave been far gone in obsolescence before the twentieth century began, but they made appeals to the large
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
73


survivals of nationalist and racial feeling that were everywhere to be found, they alleged with considerable justicethat the council was overriding racial and national customs and disregarding religious rules. The great plain ofIndia was particularly prolific in such agitators. The revival of newspapers, which had largely ceased during theterrible year because of the dislocation of the coinage, gave a vehicle and a method of organisation to thesecomplaints. At first the council disregarded this developing opposition, and then it recognised it with an entirelydevastating frankness.
Never, of course, had there been so provisional a government. It was of an extravagant illegality. It was, indeed,hardly more than a club, a club of about a hundred persons. At the outset there were ninety−three, and these wereincreased afterwards by the issue of invitations which more than balanced its deaths, to as many at one time asone hundred and nineteen. Always its constitution has been miscellaneous. At no time were these invitationsissued with an admission that they recognised a right. The old institution or monarchy had come out unexpectedlywell in the light of the new regime. Nine of the original members of the first government were crowned headswho had resigned their separate sovereignty, and at no time afterwards did the number of its royal members sinkbelow six. In their case there was perhaps a kind of attenuated claim to rule, but except for them and the still moreinfinitesimal pretensions of one or two ax−presidents of republics, no member of the council had even the shadeof a right to his participation in its power. It was natural, therefore, that its opponents should find a commonground in a clamour for representative government, and build high hopes upon a return, to parliamentaryinstitutions.
The council decided to give them everything they wanted, but in a form that suited ill with their aspirations. Itbecame at one stroke a representative body. It became, indeed, magnificently representative. It became sorepresentative that the politicians were drowned in a deluge of votes. Every adult of either sex from pole to polewas given a vote, and the world was divided into ten constituencies, which voted on the same day by means of asimple modification of the world post. Membership of the government, it was decided, must be for life, save inthe exceptional case of a recall; but the elections, which were held quinquenially, were arranged to add fiftymembers on each occasion. The method of proportional representation with one transferable vote was adopted,and the voter might also write upon his voting paper in a specially marked space, the name of any of hisrepresentatives that he wished to recall. A ruler was recallable by as many votes as the quota by which he hadbeen elected, and the original members by as many votes in any constituency as the returning quotas in the firstelection.
Upon these conditions the council submitted itself very cheerfully to the suffrages of the world. None of itsmembers were recalled, and its fifty new associates, which included twenty−seven which it had seen fit torecommend, were of an altogether too miscellaneous quality to disturb the broad trend of its policy. Its freedomfrom rules or formalities prevented any obstructive proceedings, and when one of the two newly arrived HomeRule members for India sought for information how to bring in a bill, they learnt simply that bills were notbrought in. They asked for the speaker, and were privileged to hear much ripe wisdom from the ex−king Egbert,who was now consciously among the seniors of the gathering. Thereafter they were baffled men....
But already by that time the work of the council was drawing to an end. It was concerned not so much for thecontinuation of its construction as for the preservation of its accomplished work from the dramatic instincts of thepolitician.
The life of the race becomes indeed more and more independent of the formal government. The council, in itsopening phase, was heroic in spirit; a dragon−slaying body, it slashed out of existence a vast, knotted tangle ofobsolete ideas and clumsy and jealous proprietorships; it secured by a noble system of institutional precautions,freedom of inquiry, freedom of criticism, free communications, a common basis of education and understanding,and freedom from economic oppression. With that its creative task was accomplished. It became more and morean established security and less and less an active intervention. There is nothing in our time to correspond with thecontinual petty making and entangling of laws in an atmosphere of contention that is perhaps the most perplexing
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
74


aspect of constitutional history in the nineteenth century. In that age they seem to have been perpetually makinglaws when we should alter regulations. The work of change which we delegate to these scientific committees ofspecific general direction which have the special knowledge needed, and which are themselves dominated by thebroad intellectual process of the community, was in those days inextricably mixed up with legislation. Theyfought over the details; we should as soon think of fighting over the arrangement of the parts of a machine. Weknow nowadays that such things go on best within laws, as life goes on between earth and sky. And so it is thatgovernment gathers now for a day or so in each year under the sunshine of Brissago when Saint Bruno's lilies arein flower, and does little more than bless the work of its committees. And even these committees are lessoriginative and more expressive of the general thought than they were at first. It becomes difficult to mark out theparticular directive personalities of the world. Continually we are less personal. Every good thought contributesnow, and every able brain falls within that informal and dispersed kingship which gathers together into onepurpose the energies of the race.
### Section 10

It is doubtful if we shall ever see again a phase of human existence in which 'politics,' that is to say a partisaninterference with the ruling sanities of the world, will be the dominant interest among serious men. We seem tohave entered upon an entirely new phase in history in which contention as distinguished from rivalry, has almostabruptly ceased to be the usual occupation, and has become at most a subdued and hidden and discredited thing.Contentious professions cease to be an honourable employment for men. The peace between nations is also apeace between individuals. We live in a world that comes of age. Man the warrior, man the lawyer, and all thebickering aspects of life, pass into obscurity; the grave dreamers, man the curious learner, and man the creativeartist, come forward to replace these barbaric aspects of existence by a less ignoble adventure.
There is no natural life of man. He is, and always has been, a sheath of varied and even incompatible possibilities,a palimpsest of inherited dispositions. It was the habit of many writers in the early twentieth century to speak ofcompetition and the narrow, private life of trade and saving and suspicious isolation as though such things were insome exceptional way proper to the human constitution, and as though openness of mind and a preference forachievement over possession were abnormal and rather unsubstantial qualities. How wrong that was the history ofthe decades immediately following the establishment of the world republic witnesses. Once the world wasreleased from the hardening insecurities of a needless struggle for life that was collectively planless andindividually absorbing, it became apparent that there was in the vast mass of people a long, smothered passion tomake things. The world broke out into making, and at first mainly into aesthetic making. This phase of history,which has been not inaptly termed the 'Efflorescence,' is still, to a large extent, with us. The majority of ourpopulation consists of artists, and the bulk of activity in the world lies no longer with necessities but with theirelaboration, decoration, and refinement. There has been an evident change in the quality of this making duringrecent years. It becomes more purposeful than it was, losing something of its first elegance and prettiness andgaining in intensity; but that is a change rather of hue than of nature. That comes with a deepening philosophy anda sounder education. For the first joyous exercises of fancy we perceive now the deliberation of a moreconstructive imagination. There is a natural order in these things, and art comes before science as the satisfactionof more elemental needs must come before art, and as play and pleasure come in a human life before thedevelopment of a settled purpose....
For thousands of years this gathering impulse to creative work must have struggled in man against the limitationsimposed upon him by his social ineptitude. It was a long smouldering fire that flamed out at last in all thesethings. The evidence of a pathetic, perpetually thwarted urgency to make something, is one of the most touchingaspects of the relics and records of our immediate ancestors. There exists still in the death area about the Londonbombs, a region of deserted small homes that furnish the most illuminating comment on the old state of affairs.These homes are entirely horrible, uniform, square, squat, hideously proportioned, uncomfortable, dingy, and insome respects quite filthy, only people in complete despair of anything better could have lived in them, but toeach is attached a ridiculous little rectangle of land called 'the garden,' containing usually a prop for drying clothes
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
75


and a loathsome box of offal, the dustbin, full of egg−shells, cinders, and such−like refuse. Now that one may goabout this region in comparitive security−−for the London radiations have dwindled to inconsiderableproportions−−it is possible to trace in nearly every one of these gardens some effort to make. Here it is a poorlittle plank summer−house, here it is a 'fountain' of bricks and oyster−shells, here a 'rockery,' here a 'workshop.'And in the houses everywhere there are pitiful little decorations, clumsy models, feeble drawings. These effortsare almost incredibly inept, like the drawings of blindfolded men, they are only one shade less harrowing to asympathetic observer than the scratchings one finds upon the walls of the old prisons, but there they are,witnessing to the poor buried instincts that struggled up towards the light. That god of joyous expression our poorfathers ignorantly sought, our freedom has declared to us....
In the old days the common ambition of every simple soul was to possess a little property, a patch of land, a houseuncontrolled by others, an 'independence' as the English used to put it. And what made this desire for freedom andprosperity so strong, was very evidently the dream of self−expression, of doing something with it, of playing withit, of making a personal delightfulness, a distinctiveness. Property was never more than a means to an end, noravarice more than a perversion. Men owned in order to do freely. Now that every one has his own apartments andhis own privacy secure, this disposition to own has found its release in a new direction. Men study and save andstrive that they may leave behind them a series of panels in some public arcade, a row of carven figures along aterrace, a grove, a pavilion. Or they give themselves to the penetration of some still opaque riddle in phenomenaas once men gave themselves to the accumulation of riches. The work that was once the whole substance of socialexistence−−for most men spent all their lives in earning a living−−is now no more than was the burden upon oneof those old climbers who carried knapsacks of provisions on their backs in order that they might ascendmountains. It matters little to the easy charities of our emancipated time that most people who have made theirlabour contribution produce neither new beauty nor new wisdom, but are simply busy about those pleasantactivities and enjoyments that reassure them that they are alive. They help, it may be, by reception andreverberation, and they hinder nothing. ...
### Section 11

Now all this phase of gigantic change in the contours and appearances of human life which is going on about us, achange as rapid and as wonderful as the swift ripening of adolescence to manhood after the barbaric boyish years,is correlated with moral and mental changes at least as unprecedented. It is not as if old things were going out oflife and new things coming in, it is rather that the altered circumstances of men are making an appeal to elementsin his nature that have hitherto been suppressed, and checking tendencies that have hitherto been over−stimulatedand over−developed. He has not so much grown and altered his essential being as turned new aspects to the light.Such turnings round into a new attitude the world has seen on a less extensive scale before. The Highlanders ofthe seventeenth century, for example, were cruel and bloodthirsty robbers, in the nineteenth their descendantswere conspicuously trusty and honourable men. There was not a people in Western Europe in the early twentiethcentury that seemed capable of hideous massacres, and none that had not been guilty of them within the previoustwo centuries. The free, frank, kindly, gentle life of the prosperous classes in any European country before theyears of the last wars was in a different world of thought and feeling from that of the dingy, suspicious, secretive,and uncharitable existence of the respectable poor, or the constant personal violence, the squalor and naivepassions of the lowest stratum. Yet there were no real differences of blood and inherent quality between theseworlds; their differences were all in circumstances, suggestion, and habits of mind. And turning to moreindividual instances the constantly observed difference between one portion of a life and another consequent upona religious conversion, were a standing example of the versatile possibilities of human nature.
The catastrophe of the atomic bombs which shook men out of cities and businesses and economic relations shookthem also out of their old established habits of thought, and out of the lightly held beliefs and prejudices that camedown to them from the past. To borrow a word from the old−fashioned chemists, men were made nascent; theywere released from old ties; for good or evil they were ready for new associations. The council carried themforward for good; perhaps if his bombs had reached their destination King Ferdinand Charles might have carried
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
76


them back to an endless chain of evils. But his task would have been a harder one than the council's. The moralshock of the atomic bombs had been a profound one, and for a while the cunning side of the human animal wasoverpowered by its sincere realisation of the vital necessity for reconstruction. The litigious and trading spiritscowered together, scared at their own consequences; men thought twice before they sought mean advantages inthe face of the unusual eagerness to realise new aspirations, and when at last the weeds revived again and 'claims'began to sprout, they sprouted upon the stony soil of law−courts reformed, of laws that pointed to the futureinstead of the past, and under the blazing sunshine of a transforming world. A new literature, a new interpretationof history were springing into existence, a new teaching was already in the schools, a new faith in the young. Theworthy man who forestalled the building of a research city for the English upon the Sussex downs by buying up aseries of estates, was dispossessed and laughed out of court when he made his demand for some preposterouscompensation; the owner of the discredited Dass patents makes his last appearance upon the scroll of history asthe insolvent proprietor of a paper called The Cry for Justice, in which he duns the world for a hundred millionpounds. That was the ingenuous Dass's idea of justice, that he ought to be paid about five million pounds annuallybecause he had annexed the selvage of one of Holsten's discoveries. Dass came at last to believe quite firmly inhis right, and he died a victim of conspiracy mania in a private hospital at Nice. Both of these men wouldprobably have ended their days enormously wealthy, and of course ennobled in the England of the openingtwentieth century, and it is just this novelty of their fates that marks the quality of the new age.
The new government early discovered the need of a universal education to fit men to the great conceptions of itsuniversal rule. It made no wrangling attacks on the local, racial, and sectarian forms of religious profession that atthat time divided the earth into a patchwork of hatreds and distrusts; it left these organisations to make their peacewith God in their own time; but it proclaimed as if it were a mere secular truth that sacrifice was expected fromall, that respect had to be shown to all; it revived schools or set them up afresh all around the world, andeverywhere these schools taught the history of war and the consequences and moral of the Last War; everywhereit was taught not as a sentiment but as a matter of fact that the salvation of the world from waste and contentionwas the common duty and occupation of all men and women. These things which are now the elementarycommonplaces of human intercourse seemed to the councillors of Brissago, when first they dared to proclaimthem, marvellously daring discoveries, not untouched by doubt, that flushed the cheek and fired the eye.
The council placed all this educational reconstruction in the hands of a committee of men and women, which didits work during the next few decades with remarkable breadth and effectiveness. This educational committee was,and is, the correlative upon the mental and spiritual side of the redistribution committee. And prominent upon it,and indeed for a time quite dominating it, was a Russian named Karenin, who was singular in being a congenitalcripple. His body was bent so that he walked with difficulty, suffered much pain as he grew older, and had at lastto undergo two operations. The second killed him. Already malformation, which was to be seen in every crowdduring the middle ages so that the crippled beggar was, as it were, an essential feature of the human spectacle, wasbecoming a strange thing in the world. It had a curious effect upon Karenin's colleagues; their feeling towards himwas mingled with pity and a sense of inhumanity that it needed usage rather than reason to overcome. He had astrong face, with little bright brown eyes rather deeply sunken and a large resolute thin−lipped mouth. His skinwas very yellow and wrinkled, and his hair iron gray. He was at all times an impatient and sometimes an angryman, but this was forgiven him because of the hot wire of suffering that was manifestly thrust through his being.At the end of his life his personal prestige was very great. To him far more than to any contemporary is it due thatself−abnegation, self−identification with the world spirit, was made the basis of universal education. That generalmemorandum to the teachers which is the key−note of the modern educational system, was probably entirely hiswork.
'Whosoever would save his soul shall lose it,' he wrote. 'That is the device upon the seal of this document, and thestarting point of all we have to do. It is a mistake to regard it as anything but a plain statement of fact. It is thebasis for your work. You have to teach self−forgetfulness, and everything else that you have to teach iscontributory and subordinate to that end. Education is the release of man from self. You have to widen thehorizons of your children, encourage and intensify their curiosity and their creative impulses, and cultivate and
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
77


enlarge their sympathies. That is what you are for. Under your guidance and the suggestions you will bring to bearon them, they have to shed the old Adam of instinctive suspicions, hostilities, and passions, and to findthemselves again in the great being of the universe. The little circles of their egotisms have to be opened out untilthey become arcs in the sweep of the racial purpose. And this that you teach to others you must learn alsosedulously yourselves. Philosophy, discovery, art, every sort of skill, every sort of service, love: these are themeans of salvation from that narrow loneliness of desire, that brooding preoccupation with self and egotisticalrelationships, which is hell for the individual, treason to the race, and exile from God....'
### Section 12

As things round themselves off and accomplish themselves, one begins for the first time to see them clearly. Fromthe perspectives of a new age one can look back upon the great and widening stream of literature with a completeunderstanding. Things link up that seemed disconnected, and things that were once condemned as harsh andaimless are seen to be but factors in the statement of a gigantic problem. An enormous bulk of the sincerer writingof the eighteenth, nineteenth, and twentieth centuries falls together now into an unanticipated unanimity; one seesit as a huge tissue of variations upon one theme, the conflict of human egotism and personal passion and narrowimaginations on the one hand, against the growing sense of wider necessities and a possible, more spacious life.
That conflict is in evidence in so early a work as Voltaire's Candide, for example, in which the desire for justice aswell as happiness beats against human contrariety and takes refuge at last in a forced and inconclusivecontentment with little things. Candide was but one of the pioneers of a literature of uneasy complaint that waspresently an innumerable multitude of books. The novels more particularly of the nineteenth century, if oneexcludes the mere story−tellers from our consideration, witness to this uneasy realisation of changes that call foreffort and of the lack of that effort. In a thousand aspects, now tragically, now comically, now with a funnyaffectation of divine detachment, a countless host of witnesses tell their story of lives fretting between dreams andlimitations. Now one laughs, now one weeps, now one reads with a blank astonishment at this huge and almostunpremeditated record of how the growing human spirit, now warily, now eagerly, now furiously, and always, asit seems, unsuccessfully, tried to adapt itself to the maddening misfit of its patched and ancient garments. Andalways in these books as one draws nearer to the heart of the matter there comes a disconcerting evasion. It wasthe fantastic convention of the time that a writer should not touch upon religion. To do so was to rouse the jealousfury of the great multitude of professional religious teachers. It was permitted to state the discord, but it wasforbidden to glance at any possible reconciliation. Religion was the privilege of the pulpit....
It was not only from the novels that religion was omitted. It was ignored by the newspapers; it was pedanticallydisregarded in the discussion of business questions, it played a trivial and apologetic part in public affairs. Andthis was done not out of contempt but respect. The hold of the old religious organisations upon men's respect wasstill enormous, so enormous that there seemed to be a quality of irreverence in applying religion to thedevelopments of every day. This strange suspension of religion lasted over into the beginnings of the new age. Itwas the clear vision of Marcus Karenin much more than any other contemporary influence which brought it backinto the texture of human life. He saw religion without hallucinations, without superstitious reverence, as acommon thing as necessary as food and air, as land and energy to the life of man and the well−being of theRepublic. He saw that indeed it had already percolated away from the temples and hierarchies and symbols inwhich men had sought to imprison it, that it was already at work anonymously and obscurely in the universalacceptance of the greater state. He gave it clearer expression, rephrased it to the lights and perspectives of the newdawn....
But if we return to our novels for our evidence of the spirit of the times it becomes evident as one reads them intheir chronological order, so far as that is now ascertainable, that as one comes to the latter nineteenth and theearlier twentieth century the writers are much more acutely aware of secular change than their predecessors were.The earlier novelists tried to show 'life as it is,' the latter showed life as it changes. More and more of theircharacters are engaged in adaptation to change or suffering from the effects of world changes. And as we come up
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
78


to the time of the Last Wars, this newer conception of the everyday life as a reaction to an accelerateddevelopment is continually more manifest. Barnet's book, which has served us so well, is frankly a picture of theworld coming about like a ship that sails into the wind. Our later novelists give a vast gallery of individualconflicts in which old habits and customs, limited ideas, ungenerous temperaments, and innate obsessions arepitted against this great opening out of life that has happened to us. They tell us of the feelings of old people whohave been wrenched away from familiar surroundings, and how they have had to make peace with uncomfortablecomforts and conveniences that are still strange to them. They give us the discord between the opening egotismsof youths and the ill−defined limitations of a changing social life. They tell of the universal struggle of jealousy tocapture and cripple our souls, of romantic failures and tragical misconceptions of the trend of the world, of thespirit of adventure, and the urgency of curiosity, and how these serve the universal drift. And all their stories leadin the end either to happiness missed or happiness won, to disaster or salvation. The clearer their vision and thesubtler their art, the more certainly do these novels tell of the possibility of salvation for all the world. For anyroad in life leads to religion for those upon it who will follow it far enough....
It would have seemed a strange thing to the men of the former time that it should be an open question as it isto−day whether the world is wholly Christian or not Christian at all. But assuredly we have the spirit, and assurely have we left many temporary forms behind. Christianity was the first expression of world religion, the firstcomplete repudiation of tribalism and war and disputation. That it fell presently into the ways of more ancientrituals cannot alter that. The common sense of mankind has toiled through two thousand years of chasteningexperience to find at last how sound a meaning attaches to the familiar phrases of the Christian faith. Thescientific thinker as he widens out to the moral problems of the collective life, comes inevitably upon the words ofChrist, and as inevitably does the Christian, as his thought grows clearer, arrive at the world republic. As for theclaims of the sects, as for the use of a name and successions, we live in a time that has shaken itself free fromsuch claims and consistencies.
