## CHAPTER THE SECOND. THE LAST WAR

### Section I

### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
24


Viewed from the standpoint of a sane and ambitious social order, it is difficult to understand, and it would betedious to follow, the motives that plunged mankind into the war that fills the histories of the middle decades ofthe twentieth century.
It must always be remembered that the political structure of the world at that time was everywhere extraordinarilybehind the collective intelligence. That is the central fact of that history. For two hundred years there had been nogreat changes in political or legal methods and pretensions, the utmost change had been a certain shifting ofboundaries and slight readjustment of procedure, while in nearly every other aspect of life there had beenfundamental revolutions, gigantic releases, and an enormous enlargement of scope and outlook. The absurdities ofcourts and the indignities of representative parliamentary government, coupled with the opening of vast fields ofopportunity in other directions, had withdrawn the best intelligences more and more from public affairs. Theostensible governments of the world in the twentieth century were following in the wake of the ostensiblereligions. They were ceasing to command the services of any but second−rate men. After the middle of theeighteenth century there are no more great ecclesiastics upon the world's memory, after the opening of thetwentieth no more statesmen. Everywhere one finds an energetic, ambitious, short−sighted, common−place typein the seats of authority, blind to the new possibilities and litigiously reliant upon the traditions of the past.
Perhaps the most dangerous of those outworn traditions were the boundaries of the various 'sovereign states,' andthe conception of a general predominance in human affairs on the part of some one particular state. The memoryof the empires of Rome and Alexander squatted, an unlaid carnivorous ghost, in the human imagination−−it boredinto the human brain like some grisly parasite and filled it with disordered thoughts and violent impulses. Formore than a century the French system exhausted its vitality in belligerent convulsions, and then the infectionpassed to the German−speaking peoples who were the heart and centre of Europe, and from them onward to theSlavs. Later ages were to store and neglect the vast insane literature of this obsession, the intricate treaties, thesecret agreements, the infinite knowingness of the political writer, the cunning refusals to accept plain facts, thestrategic devices, the tactical manoeuvres, the records of mobilisations and counter−mobilisations. It ceased to becredible almost as soon as it ceased to happen, but in the very dawn of the new age their state craftsmen sat withtheir historical candles burning, and, in spite of strange, new reflections and unfamiliar lights and shadows, stillwrangling and planning to rearrange the maps of Europe and the world.
It was to become a matter for subtle inquiry how far the millions of men and women outside the world of thesespecialists sympathised and agreed with their portentous activities. One school of psychologists inclined tominimise this participation, but the balance of evidence goes to show that there were massive responses to thesesuggestions of the belligerent schemer. Primitive man had been a fiercely combative animal; innumerablegenerations had passed their lives in tribal warfare, and the weight of tradition, the example of history, the idealsof loyalty and devotion fell in easily enough with the incitements of the international mischief−maker. Thepolitical ideas of the common man were picked up haphazard, there was practically nothing in such education ashe was given that was ever intended to fit him for citizenship as such (that conception only appeared, indeed, withthe development of Modern State ideas), and it was therefore a comparatively easy matter to fill his vacant mindwith the sounds and fury of exasperated suspicion and national aggression.
For example, Barnet describes the London crowd as noisily patriotic when presently his battalion came up fromthe depot to London, to entrain for the French frontier. He tells of children and women and lads and old mencheering and shouting, of the streets and rows hung with the flags of the Allied Powers, of a real enthusiasm evenamong the destitute and unemployed. The Labour Bureaux were now partially transformed into enrolment offices,and were centres of hotly patriotic excitement. At every convenient place upon the line on either side of theChannel Tunnel there were enthusiastic spectators, and the feeling in the regiment, if a little stiffened anddarkened by grim anticipations, was none the less warlike.
But all this emotion was the fickle emotion of minds without established ideas; it was with most of them, Barnetsays, as it was with himself, a natural response to collective movement, and to martial sounds and colours, and the
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
25


exhilarating challenge of vague dangers. And people had been so long oppressed by the threat of and preparationfor war that its arrival came with an effect of positive relief.
### Section 2

The plan of campaign of the Allies assigned the defence of the lower Meuse to the English, and the troop−trainswere run direct from the various British depots to the points in the Ardennes where they were intended to entrenchthemselves.
Most of the documents bearing upon the campaign were destroyed during the war, from the first the scheme of theAllies seems to have been confused, but it is highly probable that the formation of an aerial park in this region,from which attacks could be made upon the vast industrial plant of the lower Rhine, and a flanking raid throughHolland upon the German naval establishments at the mouth of the Elbe, were integral parts of the originalproject. Nothing of this was known to such pawns in the game as Barnet and his company, whose business it wasto do what they were told by the mysterious intelligences at the direction of things in Paris, to which city theWhitehall staff had also been transferred. From first to last these directing intelligences remained mysterious tothe body of the army, veiled under the name of 'Orders.' There was no Napoleon, no Caesar to embodyenthusiasm. Barnet says, 'We talked of Them. THEY are sending us up into Luxembourg. THEY are going to turnthe Central European right.'
Behind the veil of this vagueness the little group of more or less worthy men which constituted Headquarters wasbeginning to realise the enormity of the thing it was supposed to control....
In the great hall of the War Control, whose windows looked out across the Seine to the Trocadero and the palacesof the western quarter, a series of big−scale relief maps were laid out upon tables to display the whole seat of war,and the staff−officers of the control were continually busy shifting the little blocks which represented thecontending troops, as the reports and intelligence came drifting in to the various telegraphic bureaux in theadjacent rooms. In other smaller apartments there were maps of a less detailed sort, upon which, for example, thereports of the British Admiralty and of the Slav commanders were recorded as they kept coming to hand. Uponthese maps, as upon chessboards, Marshal Dubois, in consultation with General Viard and the Earl of Delhi, wasto play the great game for world supremacy against the Central European powers. Very probably he had a definiteidea of his game; very probably he had a coherent and admirable plan.
But he had reckoned without a proper estimate either of the new strategy of aviation or of the possibilities ofatomic energy that Holsten had opened for mankind. While he planned entrenchments and invasions and a frontierwar, the Central European generalship was striking at the eyes and the brain. And while, with a certain diffidenthesitation, he developed his gambit that night upon the lines laid down by Napoleon and Moltke, his ownscientific corps in a state of mutinous activity was preparing a blow for Berlin. 'These old fools!' was the key inwhich the scientific corps was thinking.
The War Control in Paris, on the night of July the second, was an impressive display of the paraphernalia ofscientific military organisation, as the first half of the twentieth century understood it. To one human being atleast the consulting commanders had the likeness of world−wielding gods.
She was a skilled typist, capable of nearly sixty words a minute, and she had been engaged in relay with othersimilar women to take down orders in duplicate and hand them over to the junior officers in attendance, to beforwarded and filed. There had come a lull, and she had been sent out from the dictating room to take the air uponthe terrace before the great hall and to eat such scanty refreshment as she had brought with her until her serviceswere required again.
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
26


From her position upon the terrace this young woman had a view not only of the wide sweep of the river belowher, and all the eastward side of Paris from the Arc de Triomphe to Saint Cloud, great blocks and masses of blackor pale darkness with pink and golden flashes of illumination and endless interlacing bands of dotted lights undera still and starless sky, but also the whole spacious interior of the great hall with its slender pillars and graciousarching and clustering lamps was visible to her. There, over a wilderness of tables, lay the huge maps, done on solarge a scale that one might fancy them small countries; the messengers and attendants went and cameperpetually, altering, moving the little pieces that signified hundreds and thousands of men, and the greatcommander and his two consultants stood amidst all these things and near where the fighting was nearest,scheming, directing. They had but to breathe a word and presently away there, in the world of reality, the punctualmyriads moved. Men rose up and went forward and died. The fate of nations lay behind the eyes of these threemen. Indeed they were like gods.
Most godlike of the three was Dubois. It was for him to decide; the others at most might suggest. Her woman'ssoul went out to this grave, handsome, still, old man, in a passion of instinctive worship.
Once she had taken words of instruction from him direct. She had awaited them in an ecstasy of happiness−−andfear. For her exaltation was made terrible by the dread that some error might dishonour her....
She watched him now through the glass with all the unpenetrating minuteness of an impassioned woman'sobservation.
He said little, she remarked. He looked but little at the maps. The tall Englishman beside him was manifestlytroubled by a swarm of ideas, conflicting ideas; he craned his neck at every shifting of the little red, blue, black,and yellow pieces on the board, and wanted to draw the commander's attention to this and that. Dubois listened,nodded, emitted a word and became still again, brooding like the national eagle.
His eyes were so deeply sunken under his white eyebrows that she could not see his eyes; his moustache overhungthe mouth from which those words of decision came. Viard, too, said little; he was a dark man with a droopinghead and melancholy, watchful eyes. He was more intent upon the French right, which was feeling its way nowthrough Alsace to the Rhine. He was, she knew, an old colleague of Dubois; he knew him better, she decided, hetrusted him more than this unfamiliar Englishman....
Not to talk, to remain impassive and as far as possible in profile; these were the lessons that old Dubois hadmastered years ago. To seem to know all, to betray no surprise, to refuse to hurry−−itself a confession ofmiscalculation; by attention to these simple rules, Dubois had built up a steady reputation from the days when hehad been a promising junior officer, a still, almost abstracted young man, deliberate but ready. Even then men hadlooked at him and said: 'He will go far.' Through fifty years of peace he had never once been found wanting, andat manoeuvres his impassive persistence had perplexed and hypnotised and defeated many a more activelyintelligent man. Deep in his soul Dubois had hidden his one profound discovery about the modern art of warfare,the key to his career. And this discovery was that NOBODY KNEW, that to act therefore was to blunder, that totalk was to confess; and that the man who acted slowly and steadfastly and above all silently, had the best chanceof winning through. Meanwhile one fed the men. Now by this same strategy he hoped to shatter those mysteriousunknowns of the Central European command. Delhi might talk of a great flank march through Holland, with allthe British submarines and hydroplanes and torpedo craft pouring up the Rhine in support of it; Viard might cravefor brilliance with the motor bicycles, aeroplanes, and ski−men among the Swiss mountains, and a sudden swoopupon Vienna; the thing was to listen−−and wait for the other side to begin experimenting. It was allexperimenting. And meanwhile he remained in profile, with an air of assurance−−like a man who sits in anautomobile after the chauffeur has had his directions.
And every one about him was the stronger and surer for that quiet face, that air of knowledge and unruffledconfidence. The clustering lights threw a score of shadows of him upon the maps, great bunches of him, versions
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
27


of a commanding presence, lighter or darker, dominated the field, and pointed in every direction. Those shadowssymbolised his control. When a messenger came from the wireless room to shift this or that piece in the game, toreplace under amended reports one Central European regiment by a score, to draw back or thrust out or distributethis or that force of the Allies, the Marshal would turn his head and seem not to see, or look and nod slightly, as amaster nods who approves a pupil's self−correction. 'Yes, that's better.'
How wonderful he was, thought the woman at the window, how wonderful it all was. This was the brain of thewestern world, this was Olympus with the warring earth at its feet. And he was guiding France, France so long aresentful exile from imperialism, back to her old predominance.
It seemed to her beyond the desert of a woman that she should be privileged to participate....
It is hard to be a woman, full of the stormy impulse to personal devotion, and to have to be impersonal, abstract,exact, punctual. She must control herself....
She gave herself up to fantastic dreams, dreams of the days when the war would be over and victory enthroned.Then perhaps this harshness, this armour would be put aside and the gods might unbend. Her eyelids drooped....
She roused herself with a start. She became aware that the night outside was no longer still. That there was anexcitement down below on the bridge and a running in the street and a flickering of searchlights among the cloudsfrom some high place away beyond the Trocadero. And then the excitement came surging up past her and invadedthe hall within.
One of the sentinels from the terrace stood at the upper end of the room, gesticulating and shouting something.
And all the world had changed. A kind of throbbing. She couldn't understand. It was as if all the water−pipes andconcealed machinery and cables of the ways beneath, were beating−−as pulses beat. And about her blewsomething like a wind−−a wind that was dismay.
Her eyes went to the face of the Marshal as a frightened child might look towards its mother.
He was still serene. He was frowning slightly, she thought, but that was natural enough, for the Earl of Delhi, withone hand gauntly gesticulating, had taken him by the arm and was all too manifestly disposed to drag him towardsthe great door that opened on the terrace. And Viard was hurrying towards the huge windows and doing so in thestrangest of attitudes, bent forward and with eyes upturned.
Something up there?
And then it was as if thunder broke overhead.
The sound struck her like a blow. She crouched together against the masonry and looked up. She saw three blackshapes swooping down through the torn clouds, and from a point a little below two of them, there had alreadystarted curling trails of red....
Everything else in her being was paralysed, she hung through moments that seemed infinities, watching those redmissiles whirl down towards her.
She felt torn out of the world. There was nothing else in the world but a crimson−purple glare and sound,deafening, all−embracing, continuing sound. Every other light had gone out about her and against this glare hungslanting walls, pirouetting pillars, projecting fragments of cornices, and a disorderly flight of huge angular sheetsof glass. She had an impression of a great ball of crimson−purple fire like a maddened living thing that seemed to
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
28


be whirling about very rapidly amidst a chaos of falling masonry, that seemed to be attacking the earth furiously,that seemed to be burrowing into it like a blazing rabbit . . .
She had all the sensations of waking up out of a dream.
She found she was lying face downward on a bank of mould and that a little rivulet of hot water was running overone foot. She tried to raise herself and found her leg was very painful. She was not clear whether it was night orday nor where she was; she made a second effort, wincing and groaning, and turned over and got into a sittingposition and looked about her.
Everything seemed very silent. She was, in fact, in the midst of a vast uproar, but she did not realise this becauseher hearing had been destroyed.
At first she could not join on what she saw to any previous experience.
She seemed to be in a strange world, a soundless, ruinous world, a world of heaped broken things. And it waslit−−and somehow this was more familiar to her mind than any other fact about her−−by a flickering,purplish−crimson light. Then close to her, rising above a confusion of debris, she recognised the Trocadero; it waschanged, something had gone from it, but its outline was unmistakable. It stood out against a streaming, whirlinguprush of red−lit steam. And with that she recalled Paris and the Seine and the warm, overcast evening and thebeautiful, luminous organisation of the War Control....
She drew herself a little way up the slope of earth on which she lay, and examined her surroundings with anincreasing understanding....
The earth on which she was lying projected like a cape into the river. Quite close to her was a brimming lake ofdammed−up water, from which these warm rivulets and torrents were trickling. Wisps of vapour came intocircling existence a foot or so from its mirror−surface. Near at hand and reflected exactly in the water was theupper part of a familiar−looking stone pillar. On the side of her away from the water the heaped ruins rose steeplyin a confused slope up to a glaring crest. Above and reflecting this glare towered pillowed masses of steam rollingswiftly upward to the zenith. It was from this crest that the livid glow that lit the world about her proceeded, andslowly her mind connected this mound with the vanished buildings of the War Control.
'Mais!' she whispered, and remained with staring eyes quite motionless for a time, crouching close to the warmearth.
Then presently this dim, broken human thing began to look about it again. She began to feel the need offellowship. She wanted to question, wanted to speak, wanted to relate her experience. And her foot hurt heratrociously. There ought to be an ambulance. A little gust of querulous criticisms blew across her mind. Thissurely was a disaster! Always after a disaster there should be ambulances and helpers moving about....
She craned her head. There was something there. But everything was so still!
'Monsieur!' she cried. Her ears, she noted, felt queer, and she began to suspect that all was not well with them.
It was terribly lonely in this chaotic strangeness, and perhaps this man−−if it was a man, for it was difficult tosee−−might for all his stillness be merely insensible. He might have been stunned....
The leaping glare beyond sent a ray into his corner and for a moment every little detail was distinct. It wasMarshal Dubois. He was lying against a huge slab of the war map. To it there stuck and from it there dangled littlewooden objects, the symbols of infantry and cavalry and guns, as they were disposed upon the frontier. He did not
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
29


seem to be aware of this at his back, he had an effect of inattention, not indifferent attention, but as if he werethinking....
She could not see the eyes beneath his shaggy brows, but it was evident he frowned. He frowned slightly, he hadan air of not wanting to be disturbed. His face still bore that expression of assured confidence, that conviction thatif things were left to him France might obey in security....
She did not cry out to him again, but she crept a little nearer. A strange surmise made her eyes dilate. With apainful wrench she pulled herself up so that she could see completely over the intervening lumps of smashed−upmasonry. Her hand touched something wet, and after one convulsive movement she became rigid.
It was not a whole man there; it was a piece of a man, the head and shoulders of a man that trailed down into aragged darkness and a pool of shining black....
And even as she stared the mound above her swayed and crumbled, and a rush of hot water came pouring overher. Then it seemed to her that she was dragged downward....
### Section 3

When the rather brutish young aviator with the bullet head and the black hair close−cropped en brosse, who wasin charge of the French special scientific corps, heard presently of this disaster to the War Control, he was sowanting in imagination in any sphere but his own, that he laughed. Small matter to him that Paris was burning.His mother and father and sister lived at Caudebec; and the only sweetheart he had ever had, and it was poorlove−making then, was a girl in Rouen. He slapped his second−in−command on the shoulder. 'Now,' he said,'there's nothing on earth to stop us going to Berlin and giving them tit−for−tat.... Strategy and reasons ofstate−−they're over.... Come along, my boy, and we'll just show these old women what we can do when they let ushave our heads.'
He spent five minutes telephoning and then he went out into the courtyard of the chateau in which he had beeninstalled and shouted for his automobile. Things would have to move quickly because there was scarcely an hourand a half before dawn. He looked at the sky and noted with satisfaction a heavy bank of clouds athwart the pallideast.
He was a young man of infinite shrewdness, and his material and aeroplanes were scattered all over thecountry−side, stuck away in barns, covered with hay, hidden in woods. A hawk could not have discovered any ofthem without coming within reach of a gun. But that night he only wanted one of the machines, and it was handyand quite prepared under a tarpaulin between two ricks not a couple of miles away; he was going to Berlin withthat and just one other man. Two men would be enough for what he meant to do....
He had in his hands the black complement to all those other gifts science was urging upon unregenerate mankind,the gift of destruction, and he was an adventurous rather than a sympathetic type....
He was a dark young man with something negroid about his gleaming face. He smiled like one who is favouredand anticipates great pleasures. There was an exotic richness, a chuckling flavour, about the voice in which hegave his orders, and he pointed his remarks with the long finger of a hand that was hairy and exceptionally big.
'We'll give them tit−for−tat,' he said. 'We'll give them tit−for−tat. No time to lose, boys....'
And presently over the cloud−banks that lay above Westphalia and Saxony the swift aeroplane, with its atomicengine as noiseless as a dancing sunbeam and its phosphorescent gyroscopic compass, flew like an arrow to theheart of the Central European hosts.
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
30


It did not soar very high; it skimmed a few hundred feet above the banked darknesses of cumulus that hid theworld, ready to plunge at once into their wet obscurities should some hostile flier range into vision. The tenseyoung steersman divided his attention between the guiding stars above and the level, tumbled surfaces of thevapour strata that hid the world below. Over great spaces those banks lay as even as a frozen lava−flow andalmost as still, and then they were rent by ragged areas of translucency, pierced by clear chasms, so that dimpatches of the land below gleamed remotely through abysses. Once he saw quite distinctly the plan of a bigrailway station outlined in lamps and signals, and once the flames of a burning rick showing livid through aboiling drift of smoke on the side of some great hill. But if the world was masked it was alive with sounds. Upthrough that vapour floor came the deep roar of trains, the whistles of horns of motor−cars, a sound of rifle fireaway to the south, and as he drew near his destination the crowing of cocks....
The sky above the indistinct horizons of this cloud sea was at first starry and then paler with a light that creptfrom north to east as the dawn came on. The Milky Way was invisible in the blue, and the lesser stars vanished.The face of the adventurer at the steering−wheel, darkly visible ever and again by the oval greenish glow of thecompass face, had something of that firm beauty which all concentrated purpose gives, and something of thehappiness of an idiot child that has at last got hold of the matches. His companion, a less imaginative type, satwith his legs spread wide over the long, coffin−shaped box which contained in its compartments the three atomicbombs, the new bombs that would continue to explode indefinitely and which no one so far had ever seen inaction. Hitherto Carolinum, their essential substance, had been tested only in almost infinitesimal quantitieswithin steel chambers embedded in lead. Beyond the thought of great destruction slumbering in the black spheresbetween his legs, and a keen resolve to follow out very exactly the instructions that had been given him, the man'smind was a blank. His aquiline profile against the starlight expressed nothing but a profound gloom.
The sky below grew clearer as the Central European capital was approached.
So far they had been singularly lucky and had been challenged by no aeroplanes at all. The frontier scouts theymust have passed in the night; probably these were mostly under the clouds; the world was wide and they had hadluck in not coming close to any soaring sentinel. Their machine was painted a pale gray, that lay almost invisiblyover the cloud levels below. But now the east was flushing with the near ascent of the sun, Berlin was but a scoreof miles ahead, and the luck of the Frenchmen held. By imperceptible degrees the clouds below dissolved....
Away to the north−eastward, in a cloudless pool of gathering light and with all its nocturnal illuminations stillblazing, was Berlin. The left finger of the steersman verified roads and open spaces below upon the mica−coveredsquare of map that was fastened by his wheel. There in a series of lake−like expansions was the Havel away to theright; over by those forests must be Spandau; there the river split about the Potsdam island; and right ahead wasCharlottenburg cleft by a great thoroughfare that fell like an indicating beam of light straight to the imperialheadquarters. There, plain enough, was the Thiergarten; beyond rose the imperial palace, and to the right those tallbuildings, those clustering, beflagged, bemasted roofs, must be the offices in which the Central European staffwas housed. It was all coldly clear and colourless in the dawn.
He looked up suddenly as a humming sound grew out of nothing and became swiftly louder. Nearly overhead aGerman aeroplane was circling down from an immense height to challenge him. He made a gesture with his leftarm to the gloomy man behind and then gripped his little wheel with both hands, crouched over it, and twisted hisneck to look upward. He was attentive, tightly strung, but quite contemptuous of their ability to hurt him. NoGerman alive, he was assured, could outfly him, or indeed any one of the best Frenchmen. He imagined theymight strike at him as a hawk strikes, but they were men coming down out of the bitter cold up there, in a hungry,spiritless, morning mood; they came slanting down like a sword swung by a lazy man, and not so rapidly but thathe was able to slip away from under them and get between them and Berlin. They began challenging him inGerman with a megaphone when they were still perhaps a mile away. The words came to him, rolled up into amere blob of hoarse sound. Then, gathering alarm from his grim silence, they gave chase and swept down, ahundred yards above him perhaps, and a couple of hundred behind. They were beginning to understand what he
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
31


was. He ceased to watch them and concentrated himself on the city ahead, and for a time the two aeroplanesraced....
A bullet came tearing through the air by him, as though some one was tearing paper. A second followed.Something tapped the machine.
It was time to act. The broad avenues, the park, the palaces below rushed widening out nearer and nearer to them.'Ready!' said the steersman.
The gaunt face hardened to grimness, and with both hands the bomb−thrower lifted the big atomic bomb from thebox and steadied it against the side. It was a black sphere two feet in diameter. Between its handles was a littlecelluloid stud, and to this he bent his head until his lips touched it. Then he had to bite in order to let the air inupon the inducive. Sure of its accessibility, he craned his neck over the side of the aeroplane and judged his paceand distance. Then very quickly he bent forward, bit the stud, and hoisted the bomb over the side.
'Round,' he whispered inaudibly.
The bomb flashed blinding scarlet in mid−air, and fell, a descending column of blaze eddying spirally in the midstof a whirlwind. Both the aeroplanes were tossed like shuttlecocks, hurled high and sideways and the steersman,with gleaming eyes and set teeth, fought in great banking curves for a balance. The gaunt man clung tight withhand and knees; his nostrils dilated, his teeth biting his lips. He was firmly strapped....
When he could look down again it was like looking down upon the crater of a small volcano. In the open gardenbefore the Imperial castle a shuddering star of evil splendour spurted and poured up smoke and flame towardsthem like an accusation. They were too high to distinguish people clearly, or mark the bomb's effect upon thebuilding until suddenly the facade tottered and crumbled before the flare as sugar dissolves in water. The manstared for a moment, showed all his long teeth, and then staggered into the cramped standing position his strapspermitted, hoisted out and bit another bomb, and sent it down after its fellow.
The explosion came this time more directly underneath the aeroplane and shot it upward edgeways. The bombbox tipped to the point of disgorgement, and the bomb−thrower was pitched forward upon the third bomb with hisface close to its celluloid stud. He clutched its handles, and with a sudden gust of determination that the thingshould not escape him, bit its stud. Before he could hurl it over, the monoplane was slipping sideways. Everythingwas falling sideways. Instinctively he gave himself up to gripping, his body holding the bomb in its place.
Then that bomb had exploded also, and steersman, thrower, and aeroplane were just flying rags and splinters ofmetal and drops of moisture in the air, and a third column of fire rushed eddying down upon the doomed buildingsbelow....
### Section 4

Never before in the history of warfare had there been a continuing explosive; indeed, up to the middle of thetwentieth century the only explosives known were combustibles whose explosiveness was due entirely to theirinstantaneousness; and these atomic bombs which science burst upon the world that night were strange even to themen who used them. Those used by the Allies were lumps of pure Carolinum, painted on the outside withunoxidised cydonator inducive enclosed hermetically in a case of membranium. A little celluloid stud between thehandles by which the bomb was lifted was arranged so as to be easily torn off and admit air to the inducive, whichat once became active and set up radio−activity in the outer layer of the Carolinum sphere. This liberated freshinducive, and so in a few minutes the whole bomb was a blazing continual explosion. The Central Europeanbombs were the same, except that they were larger and had a more complicated arrangement for animating theinducive.
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
32


Always before in the development of warfare the shells and rockets fired had been but momentarily explosive,they had gone off in an instant once for all, and if there was nothing living or valuable within reach of theconcussion and the flying fragments then they were spent and over. But Carolinum, which belonged to the betagroup of Hyslop's so−called 'suspended degenerator' elements, once its degenerative process had been induced,continued a furious radiation of energy and nothing could arrest it. Of all Hyslop's artificial elements, Carolinumwas the most heavily stored with energy and the most dangerous to make and handle. To this day it remains themost potent degenerator known. What the earlier twentieth−century chemists called its half period was seventeendays; that is to say, it poured out half of the huge store of energy in its great molecules in the space of seventeendays, the next seventeen days' emission was a half of that first period's outpouring, and so on. As with allradio−active substances this Carolinum, though every seventeen days its power is halved, though constantly itdiminishes towards the imperceptible, is never entirely exhausted, and to this day the battle−fields and bombfields of that frantic time in human history are sprinkled with radiant matter, and so centres of inconvenient rays.
What happened when the celluloid stud was opened was that the inducive oxidised and became active. Then thesurface of the Carolinum began to degenerate. This degeneration passed only slowly into the substance of thebomb. A moment or so after its explosion began it was still mainly an inert sphere exploding superficially, a big,inanimate nucleus wrapped in flame and thunder. Those that were thrown from aeroplanes fell in this state, theyreached the ground still mainly solid, and, melting soil and rock in their progress, bored into the earth. There, asmore and more of the Carolinum became active, the bomb spread itself out into a monstrous cavern of fieryenergy at the base of what became very speedily a miniature active volcano. The Carolinum, unable to disperse,freely drove into and mixed up with a boiling confusion of molten soil and superheated steam, and so remainedspinning furiously and maintaining an eruption that lasted for years or months or weeks according to the size ofthe bomb employed and the chances of its dispersal. Once launched, the bomb was absolutely unapproachable anduncontrollable until its forces were nearly exhausted, and from the crater that burst open above it, puffs of heavyincandescent vapour and fragments of viciously punitive rock and mud, saturated with Carolinum, and each acentre of scorching and blistering energy, were flung high and far.
Such was the crowning triumph of military science, the ultimate explosive that was to give the 'decisive touch' towar....
### Section 5

A recent historical writer has described the world of that time as one that 'believed in established words and wasinvincibly blind to the obvious in things.' Certainly it seems now that nothing could have been more obvious tothe people of the earlier twentieth century than the rapidity with which war was becoming impossible. And ascertainly they did not see it. They did not see it until the atomic bombs burst in their fumbling hands. Yet thebroad facts must have glared upon any intelligent mind. All through the nineteenth and twentieth centuries theamount of energy that men were able to command was continually increasing. Applied to warfare that meant thatthe power to inflict a blow, the power to destroy, was continually increasing. There was no increase whatever inthe ability to escape. Every sort of passive defence, armour, fortifications, and so forth, was being outmastered bythis tremendous increase on the destructive side. Destruction was becoming so facile that any little body ofmalcontents could use it; it was revolutionising the problems of police and internal rule. Before the last war beganit was a matter of common knowledge that a man could carry about in a handbag an amount of latent energysufficient to wreck half a city. These facts were before the minds of everybody; the children in the streets knewthem. And yet the world still, as the Americans used to phrase it, 'fooled around' with the paraphernalia andpretensions of war.
It is only by realising this profound, this fantastic divorce between the scientific and intellectual movement on theone hand, and the world of the lawyer−politician on the other, that the men of a later time can hope to understandthis preposterous state of affairs. Social organisation was still in the barbaric stage. There were already greatnumbers of actively intelligent men and much private and commercial civilisation, but the community, as a whole,
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
33


was aimless, untrained and unorganised to the pitch of imbecility. Collective civilisation, the 'Modern State,' wasstill in the womb of the future....
### Section 6

But let us return to Frederick Barnet's Wander Jahre and its account of the experiences of a common man duringthe war time. While these terrific disclosures of scientific possibility were happening in Paris and Berlin, Barnetand his company were industriously entrenching themselves in Belgian Luxembourg.
He tells of the mobilisation and of his summer day's journey through the north of France and the Ardennes in afew vivid phrases. The country was browned by a warm summer, the trees a little touched with autumnal colour,and the wheat already golden. When they stopped for an hour at Hirson, men and women with tricolour badgesupon the platform distributed cakes and glasses of beer to the thirsty soldiers, and there was much cheerfulness.'Such good, cool beer it was,' he wrote. 'I had had nothing to eat nor drink since Epsom.'
A number of monoplanes, 'like giant swallows,' he notes, were scouting in the pink evening sky.
Barnet's battalion was sent through the Sedan country to a place called Virton, and thence to a point in the woodson the line to Jemelle. Here they detrained, bivouacked uneasily by the railway−−trains and stores were passingalong it all night−−and next morning he: marched eastward through a cold, overcast dawn, and a morning, firstcloudy and then blazing, over a large spacious country−side interspersed by forest towards Arlon.
There the infantry were set to work upon a line of masked entrenchments and hidden rifle pits between St Hubertand Virton that were designed to check and delay any advance from the east upon the fortified line of the Meuse.They had their orders, and for two days they worked without either a sight of the enemy or any suspicion of thedisaster that had abruptly decapitated the armies of Europe, and turned the west of Paris and the centre of Berlininto blazing miniatures of the destruction of Pompeii.
And the news, when it did come, came attenuated. 'We heard there had been mischief with aeroplanes and bombsin Paris,' Barnet relates; 'but it didn't seem to follow that "They" weren't still somewhere elaborating their plansand issuing orders. When the enemy began to emerge from the woods in front of us, we cheered and blazed away,and didn't trouble much more about anything but the battle in hand. If now and then one cocked up an eye into thesky to see what was happening there, the rip of a bullet soon brought one down to the horizontal again....
That battle went on for three days all over a great stretch of country between Louvain on the north and Longwy tothe south. It was essentially a rifle and infantry struggle. The aeroplanes do not seem to have taken any decisiveshare in the actual fighting for some days, though no doubt they effected the strategy from the first by preventingsurprise movements. They were aeroplanes with atomic engines, but they were not provided with atomic bombs,which were manifestly unsuitable for field use, nor indeed had they any very effective kind of bomb. And thoughthey manoeuvred against each other, and there was rifle shooting at them and between them, there was little actualaerial fighting. Either the airmen were indisposed to fight or the commanders on both sides preferred to reservethese machines for scouting....
After a day or so of digging and scheming, Barnet found himself in the forefront of a battle. He had made hissection of rifle pits chiefly along a line of deep dry ditch that gave a means of inter−communication, he had hadthe earth scattered over the adjacent field, and he had masked his preparations with tussocks of corn and poppy.The hostile advance came blindly and unsuspiciously across the fields below and would have been very cruellyhandled indeed, if some one away to the right had not opened fire too soon.
'It was a queer thrill when these fellows came into sight,' he confesses; 'and not a bit like manoeuvres. They haltedfor a time on the edge of the wood and then came forward in an open line. They kept walking nearer to us and not
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
34


looking at us, but away to the right of us. Even when they began to be hit, and their officers' whistles woke themup, they didn't seem to see us. One or two halted to fire, and then they all went back towards the wood again.They went slowly at first, looking round at us, then the shelter of the wood seemed to draw them, and they trotted.I fired rather mechanically and missed, then I fired again, and then I became earnest to hit something, made sureof my sighting, and aimed very carefully at a blue back that was dodging about in the corn. At first I couldn'tsatisfy myself and didn't shoot, his movements were so spasmodic and uncertain; then I think he came to a ditchor some such obstacle and halted for a moment. "GOT you," I whispered, and pulled the trigger.
'I had the strangest sensations about that man. In the first instance, when I felt that I had hit him I was irradiatedwith joy and pride....
'I sent him spinning. He jumped and threw up his arms....
'Then I saw the corn tops waving and had glimpses of him flapping about. Suddenly I felt sick. I hadn't killedhim....
'In some way he was disabled and smashed up and yet able to struggle about. I began to think....
'For nearly two hours that Prussian was agonising in the corn. Either he was calling out or some one was shoutingto him....
'Then he jumped up−−he seemed to try to get up upon his feet with one last effort; and then he fell like a sack andlay quite still and never moved again.
'He had been unendurable, and I believe some one had shot him dead. I had been wanting to do so for sometime....'
The enemy began sniping the rifle pits from shelters they made for themselves in the woods below. A man was hitin the pit next to Barnet, and began cursing and crying out in a violent rage. Barnet crawled along the ditch to himand found him in great pain, covered with blood, frantic with indignation, and with the half of his right handsmashed to a pulp. 'Look at this,' he kept repeating, hugging it and then extending it. 'Damned foolery! Damnedfoolery! My right hand, sir! My right hand!'
For some time Barnet could do nothing with him. The man was consumed by his tortured realisation of the evilsilliness of war, the realisation which had come upon him in a flash with the bullet that had destroyed his skill anduse as an artificer for ever. He was looking at the vestiges with a horror that made him impenetrable to any otheridea. At last the poor wretch let Barnet tie up his bleeding stump and help him along the ditch that conducted himdeviously out of range....
When Barnet returned his men were already calling out for water, and all day long the line of pits suffered greatlyfrom thirst. For food they had chocolate and bread.
'At first,' he says, 'I was extraordinarily excited by my baptism of fire. Then as the heat of the day came on Iexperienced an enormous tedium and discomfort. The flies became extremely troublesome, and my little grave ofa rifle pit was invaded by ants. I could not get up or move about, for some one in the trees had got a mark on me. Ikept thinking of the dead Prussian down among the corn, and of the bitter outcries of my own man. Damnedfoolery! It WAS damned foolery. But who was to blame? How had we got to this? . . .
'Early in the afternoon an aeroplane tried to dislodge us with dynamite bombs, but she was hit by bullets once ortwice, and suddenly dived down over beyond the trees.
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
35


' "From Holland to the Alps this day," I thought, "there must be crouching and lying between half and a million ofmen, trying to inflict irreparable damage upon one another. The thing is idiotic to the pitch of impossibility. It is adream. Presently I shall wake up." . . .
'Then the phrase changed itself in my mind. "Presently mankind will wake up."
'I lay speculating just how many thousands of men there were among these hundreds of thousands, whose spiritswere in rebellion against all these ancient traditions of flag and empire. Weren't we, perhaps, already in the throesof the last crisis, in that darkest moment of a nightmare's horror before the sleeper will endure no more of it−−andwakes?
'I don't know how my speculations ended. I think they were not so much ended as distracted by the distantthudding of the guns that were opening fire at long range upon Namur.'
### Section 7

But as yet Barnet had seen no more than the mildest beginnings of modern warfare. So far he had taken part onlyin a little shooting. The bayonet attack by which the advanced line was broken was made at a place called CroixRouge, more than twenty miles away, and that night under cover of the darkness the rifle pits were abandoned andhe got his company away without further loss.
His regiment fell back unpressed behind the fortified lines between Namur and Sedan, entrained at a station calledMettet, and was sent northward by Antwerp and Rotterdam to Haarlem. Hence they marched into North Holland.It was only after the march into Holland that he began to realise the monstrous and catastrophic nature of thestruggle in which he was playing his undistinguished part.
He describes very pleasantly the journey through the hills and open land of Brabant, the repeated crossing of armsof the Rhine, and the change from the undulating scenery of Belgium to the flat, rich meadows, the sunlit dykeroads, and the countless windmills of the Dutch levels. In those days there was unbroken land from Alkmaar andLeiden to the Dollart. Three great provinces, South Holland, North Holland, and Zuiderzeeland, reclaimed atvarious times between the early tenth century and 1945 and all many feet below the level of the waves outside thedykes, spread out their lush polders to the northern sun and sustained a dense industrious population. An intricateweb of laws and custom and tradition ensured a perpetual vigilance and a perpetual defence against thebeleaguering sea. For more than two hundred and fifty miles from Walcheren to Friesland stretched a line ofembankments and pumping stations that was the admiration of the world.
If some curious god had chosen to watch the course of events in those northern provinces while that flankingmarch of the British was in progress, he would have found a convenient and appropriate seat for his observationupon one of the great cumulus clouds that were drifting slowly across the blue sky during all these eventful daysbefore the great catastrophe. For that was the quality of the weather, hot and clear, with something of a breeze,and underfoot dry and a little inclined to be dusty. This watching god would have looked down upon broadstretches of sunlit green, sunlit save for the creeping patches of shadow cast by the clouds, upon sky−reflectingmeres, fringed and divided up by masses of willow and large areas of silvery weeds, upon white roads lying bareto the sun and upon a tracery of blue canals. The pastures were alive with cattle, the roads had a busy traffic, ofbeasts and bicycles and gaily coloured peasants' automobiles, the hues of the innumerable motor barges in thecanal vied with the eventfulness of the roadways; and everywhere in solitary steadings, amidst ricks and barns, ingroups by the wayside, in straggling villages, each with its fine old church, or in compact towns laced with canalsand abounding in bridges and clipped trees, were human habitations.
The people of this country−side were not belligerents. The interests and sympathies alike of Holland had been sodivided that to the end she remained undecided and passive in the struggle of the world powers. And everywhere
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
36


along the roads taken by the marching armies clustered groups and crowds of impartially observant spectators,women and children in peculiar white caps and old−fashioned sabots, and elderly, clean−shaven men quietlythoughtful over their long pipes. They had no fear of their invaders; the days when 'soldiering' meant bands oflicentious looters had long since passed away....
That watcher among the clouds would have seen a great distribution of khaki−uniformed men and khaki−paintedmaterial over the whole of the sunken area of Holland. He would have marked the long trains, packed with men orpiled with great guns and war material, creeping slowly, alert for train−wreckers, along the north−going lines; hewould have seen the Scheldt and Rhine choked with shipping, and pouring out still more men and still morematerial; he would have noticed halts and provisionings and detrainments, and the long, bustling caterpillars ofcavalry and infantry, the maggot−like wagons, the huge beetles of great guns, crawling under the poplars alongthe dykes and roads northward, along ways lined by the neutral, unmolested, ambiguously observant Dutch. Allthe barges and shipping upon the canals had been requisitioned for transport. In that clear, bright, warm weather,it would all have looked from above like some extravagant festival of animated toys.
As the sun sank westward the spectacle must have become a little indistinct because of a golden haze; everythingmust have become warmer and more glowing, and because of the lengthening of the shadows more manifestly inrelief. The shadows of the tall churches grew longer and longer, until they touched the horizon and mingled in theuniversal shadow; and then, slow, and soft, and wrapping the world in fold after fold of deepening blue, came thenight−−the night at first obscurely simple, and then with faint points here and there, and then jewelled in darklingsplendour with a hundred thousand lights. Out of that mingling of darkness and ambiguous glares the noise of anunceasing activity would have arisen, the louder and plainer now because there was no longer any distraction ofsight.
It may be that watcher drifting in the pellucid gulf beneath the stars watched all through the night; it may be thathe dozed. But if he gave way to so natural a proclivity, assuredly on the fourth night of the great flank march hewas aroused, for that was the night of the battle in the air that decided the fate of Holland. The aeroplanes werefighting at last, and suddenly about him, above and below, with cries and uproar rushing out of the four quartersof heaven, striking, plunging, oversetting, soaring to the zenith and dropping to the ground, they came to assail ordefend the myriads below.
Secretly the Central European power had gathered his flying machines together, and now he threw them as a giantmight fling a handful of ten thousand knives over the low country. And amidst that swarming flight were five thatdrove headlong for the sea walls of Holland, carrying atomic bombs. From north and west and south, the alliedaeroplanes rose in response and swept down upon this sudden attack. So it was that war in the air began. Menrode upon the whirlwind that night and slew and fell like archangels. The sky rained heroes upon the astonishedearth. Surely the last fights of mankind were the best. What was the heavy pounding of your Homeric swordsmen,what was the creaking charge of chariots, beside this swift rush, this crash, this giddy triumph, this headlongswoop to death?
And then athwart this whirling rush of aerial duels that swooped and locked and dropped in the void between thelamp−lights and the stars, came a great wind and a crash louder than thunder, and first one and then a score oflengthening fiery serpents plunged hungrily down upon the Dutchmen's dykes and struck between land and seaand flared up again in enormous columns of glare and crimsoned smoke and steam.
And out of the darkness leapt the little land, with its spires and trees, aghast with terror, still and distinct, and thesea, tumbled with anger, red−foaming like a sea of blood....
Over the populous country below went a strange multitudinous crying and a flurry of alarm bells... .
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
37


The surviving aeroplanes turned about and fled out of the sky, like things that suddenly know themselves to bewicked....
Through a dozen thunderously flaming gaps that no water might quench, the waves came roaring in upon theland....
### Section 8

'We had cursed our luck,' says Barnet, 'that we could not get to our quarters at Alkmaar that night. There, we weretold, were provisions, tobacco, and everything for which we craved. But the main canal from Zaandam andAmsterdam was hopelessly jammed with craft, and we were glad of a chance opening that enabled us to get out ofthe main column and lie up in a kind of little harbour very much neglected and weedgrown before a desertedhouse. We broke into this and found some herrings in a barrel, a heap of cheeses, and stone bottles of gin in thecellar; and with this I cheered my starving men. We made fires and toasted the cheese and grilled our herrings.None of us had slept for nearly forty hours, and I determined to stay in this refuge until dawn and then if thetraffic was still choked leave the barge and march the rest of the way into Alkmaar.
'This place we had got into was perhaps a hundred yards from the canal and underneath a little brick bridge wecould see the flotilla still, and hear the voices of the soldiers. Presently five or six other barges came through andlay up in the meer near by us, and with two of these, full of men of the Antrim regiment, I shared my find ofprovisions. In return we got tobacco. A large expanse of water spread to the westward of us and beyond were acluster of roofs and one or two church towers. The barge was rather cramped for so many men, and I let severalsquads, thirty or forty perhaps altogether, bivouac on the bank. I did not let them go into the house on account ofthe furniture, and I left a note of indebtedness for the food we had taken. We were particularly glad of our tobaccoand fires, because of the numerous mosquitoes that rose about us.
'The gate of the house from which we had provisioned ourselves was adorned with the legend, Vreugde bij Vrede,"Joy with Peace," and it bore every mark of the busy retirement of a comfort−loving proprietor. I went along hisgarden, which was gay and delightful with big bushes of rose and sweet brier, to a quaint little summer−house,and there I sat and watched the men in groups cooking and squatting along the bank. The sun was setting in anearly cloudless sky.
'For the last two weeks I had been a wholly occupied man, intent only upon obeying the orders that came down tome. All through this time I had been working to the very limit of my mental and physical faculties, and my onlymoments of rest had been devoted to snatches of sleep. Now came this rare, unexpected interlude, and I couldlook detachedly upon what I was doing and feel something of its infinite wonderfulness. I was irradiated withaffection for the men of my company and with admiration at their cheerful acquiescence in the subordination andneeds of our positions. I watched their proceedings and heard their pleasant voices. How willing those men were!How ready to accept leadership and forget themselves in collective ends! I thought how manfully they had gonethrough all the strains and toil of the last two weeks, how they had toughened and shaken down to comradeshiptogether, and how much sweetness there is after all in our foolish human blood. For they were just one casualsample of the species−−their patience and readiness lay, as the energy of the atom had lain, still waiting to beproperly utilised. Again it came to me with overpowering force that the supreme need of our race is leading, thatthe supreme task is to discover leading, to forget oneself in realising the collective purpose of the race. Once moreI saw life plain....'
Very characteristic is that of the 'rather too corpulent' young officer, who was afterwards to set it all down in theWander Jahre. Very characteristic, too, it is of the change in men's hearts that was even then preparing a newphase of human history.
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
38


He goes on to write of the escape from individuality in science and service, and of his discovery of this 'salvation.'All that was then, no doubt, very moving and original; now it seems only the most obvious commonplace ofhuman life.
The glow of the sunset faded, the twilight deepened into night. The fires burnt the brighter, and some Irishmenaway across the meer started singing. But Barnet's men were too weary for that sort of thing, and soon the bankand the barge were heaped with sleeping forms.
'I alone seemed unable to sleep. I suppose I was over−weary, and after a little feverish slumber by the tiller of thebarge I sat up, awake and uneasy....
'That night Holland seemed all sky. There was just a little black lower rim to things, a steeple, perhaps, or a line ofpoplars, and then the great hemisphere swept over us. As at first the sky was empty. Yet my uneasiness referreditself in some vague way to the sky.
'And now I was melancholy. I found something strangely sorrowful and submissive in the sleepers all about me,those men who had marched so far, who had left all the established texture of their lives behind them to comeupon this mad campaign, this campaign that signified nothing and consumed everything, this mere fever offighting. I saw how little and feeble is the life of man, a thing of chances, preposterously unable to find the will torealise even the most timid of its dreams. And I wondered if always it would be so, if man was a doomed animalwho would never to the last days of his time take hold of fate and change it to his will. Always, it may be, he willremain kindly but jealous, desirous but discursive, able and unwisely impulsive, until Saturn who begot him shalldevour him in his turn....
'I was roused from these thoughts by the sudden realisation of the presence of a squadron of aeroplanes far awayto the north−east and very high. They looked like little black dashes against the midnight blue. I remember that Ilooked up at them at first rather idly−−as one might notice a flight of birds. Then I perceived that they were onlythe extreme wing of a great fleet that was advancing in a long line very swiftly from the direction of the frontierand my attention tightened.
'Directly I saw that fleet I was astonished not to have seen it before.
'I stood up softly, undesirous of disturbing my companions, but with my heart beating now rather more rapidlywith surprise and excitement. I strained my ears for any sound of guns along our front. Almost instinctively Iturned about for protection to the south and west, and peered; and then I saw coming as fast and much nearer tome, as if they had sprung out of the darkness, three banks of aeroplanes; a group of squadrons very high, a mainbody at a height perhaps of one or two thousand feet, and a doubtful number flying low and very indistinct. Themiddle ones were so thick they kept putting out groups of stars. And I realised that after all there was to befighting in the air.
'There was something extraordinarily strange in this swift, noiseless convergence of nearly invisible combatantsabove the sleeping hosts. Every one about me was still unconscious; there was no sign as yet of any agitationamong the shipping on the main canal, whose whole course, dotted with unsuspicious lights and fringed withfires, must have been clearly perceptible from above. Then a long way off towards Alkmaar I heard bugles, andafter that shots, and then a wild clamour of bells. I determined to let my men sleep on for as long as they could....
'The battle was joined with the swiftness of dreaming. I do not think it can have been five minutes from themoment when I first became aware of the Central European air fleet to the contact of the two forces. I saw it quiteplainly in silhouette against the luminous blue of the northern sky. The allied aeroplanes−−they were mostlyFrench−−came pouring down like a fierce shower upon the middle of the Central European fleet. They lookedexactly like a coarser sort of rain. There was a crackling sound−−the first sound I heard−−it reminded one of the
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
39


Aurora Borealis, and I supposed it was an interchange of rifle shots. There were flashes like summer lightning;and then all the sky became a whirling confusion of battle that was still largely noiseless. Some of the CentralEuropean aeroplanes were certainly charged and overset; others seemed to collapse and fall and then flare outwith so bright a light that it took the edge off one's vision and made the rest of the battle disappear as though ithad been snatched back out of sight.
'And then, while I still peered and tried to shade these flames from my eyes with my hand, and while the menabout me were beginning to stir, the atomic bombs were thrown at the dykes. They made a mighty thunder in theair, and fell like Lucifer in the picture, leaving a flaring trail in the sky. The night, which had been pellucid anddetailed and eventful, seemed to vanish, to be replaced abruptly by a black background to these tremendous pillarsof fire....
'Hard upon the sound of them came a roaring wind, and the sky was filled with flickering lightnings and rushingclouds....
'There was something discontinuous in this impact. At one moment I was a lonely watcher in a sleeping world;the next saw every one about me afoot, the whole world awake and amazed....
'And then the wind had struck me a buffet, taken my helmet and swept aside the summerhouse of Vreugde bijVrede, as a scythe sweeps away grass. I saw the bombs fall, and then watched a great crimson flare leapresponsive to each impact, and mountainous masses of red−lit steam and flying fragments clamber up towards thezenith. Against the glare I saw the country−side for miles standing black and clear, churches, trees, chimneys.And suddenly I understood. The Central Europeans had burst the dykes. Those flares meant the bursting of thedykes, and in a little while the sea−water would be upon us....'
He goes on to tell with a certain prolixity of the steps he took−−and all things considered they were veryintelligent steps−−to meet this amazing crisis. He got his men aboard and hailed the adjacent barges; he got theman who acted as barge engineer at his post and the engines working, he cast loose from his moorings. Then hebethought himself of food, and contrived to land five men, get in a few dozen cheeses, and ship his men againbefore the inundation reached them.
He is reasonably proud of this piece of coolness. His idea was to take the wave head−on and with his engines fullspeed ahead. And all the while he was thanking heaven he was not in the jam of traffic in the main canal. Herather, I think, overestimated the probable rush of waters; he dreaded being swept away, he explains, and smashedagainst houses and trees.
He does not give any estimate of the time it took between the bursting of the dykes and the arrival of the waters,but it was probably an interval of about twenty minutes or half an hour. He was working now in darkness−−savefor the light of his lantern−−and in a great wind. He hung out head and stern lights....
Whirling torrents of steam were pouring up from the advancing waters, which had rushed, it must be remembered,through nearly incandescent gaps in the sea defences, and this vast uprush of vapour soon veiled the flaringcentres of explosion altogether.
'The waters came at last, an advancing cascade. It was like a broad roller sweeping across the country. They camewith a deep, roaring sound. I had expected a Niagara, but the total fall of the front could not have been much morethan twelve feet. Our barge hesitated for a moment, took a dose over her bows, and then lifted. I signalled for fullspeed ahead and brought her head upstream, and held on like grim death to keep her there.
'There was a wind about as strong as the flood, and I found we were pounding against every conceivable buoyantobject that had been between us and the sea. The only light in the world now came from our lamps, the steam
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
40


became impenetrable at a score of yards from the boat, and the roar of the wind and water cut us off from allremoter sounds. The black, shining waters swirled by, coming into the light of our lamps out of an ebonyblackness and vanishing again into impenetrable black. And on the waters came shapes, came things that flashedupon us for a moment, now a half−submerged boat, now a cow, now a huge fragment of a house's timberings,now a muddle of packing−cases and scaffolding. The things clapped into sight like something shown by theopening of a shutter, and then bumped shatteringly against us or rushed by us. Once I saw very clearly a man'swhite face....
'All the while a group of labouring, half−submerged trees remained ahead of us, drawing very slowly nearer. Isteered a course to avoid them. They seemed to gesticulate a frantic despair against the black steam cloudsbehind. Once a great branch detached itself and tore shuddering by me. We did, on the whole, make headway.The last I saw of Vreugde bij Vrede before the night swallowed it, was almost dead astern of us....'
### Section 9

Morning found Barnet still afloat. The bows of his barge had been badly strained, and his men were pumping orbaling in relays. He had got about a dozen half−drowned people aboard whose boat had capsized near him, and hehad three other boats in tow. He was afloat, and somewhere between Amsterdam and Alkmaar, but he could nottell where. It was a day that was still half night. Gray waters stretched in every direction under a dark gray sky,and out of the waves rose the upper parts of houses, in many cases ruined, the tops of trees, windmills, in fact theupper third of all the familiar Dutch scenery; and on it there drifted a dimly seen flotilla of barges, small boats,many overturned, furniture, rafts, timbering, and miscellaneous objects.
The drowned were under water that morning. Only here and there did a dead cow or a stiff figure still clingingstoutly to a box or chair or such−like buoy hint at the hidden massacre. It was not till the Thursday that the deadcame to the surface in any quantity. The view was bounded on every side by a gray mist that closed overhead in agray canopy. The air cleared in the afternoon, and then, far away to the west under great banks of steam and dust,the flaming red eruption of the atomic bombs came visible across the waste of water.
They showed flat and sullen through the mist, like London sunsets. 'They sat upon the sea,' says Barnet, 'likefrayed−out waterlilies of flame.'
Barnet seems to have spent the morning in rescue work along the track of the canal, in helping people who wereadrift, in picking up derelict boats, and in taking people out of imperilled houses. He found other military bargessimilarly employed, and it was only as the day wore on and the immediate appeals for aid were satisfied that hethought of food and drink for his men, and what course he had better pursue. They had a little cheese, but nowater. 'Orders,' that mysterious direction, had at last altogether disappeared. He perceived he had now to act uponhis own responsibility.
'One's sense was of a destruction so far−reaching and of a world so altered that it seemed foolish to go in anydirection and expect to find things as they had been before the war began. I sat on the quarter−deck with Myliusmy engineer and Kemp and two others of the non−commissioned officers, and we consulted upon our line ofaction. We were foodless and aimless. We agreed that our fighting value was extremely small, and that our firstduty was to get ourselves in touch with food and instructions again. Whatever plan of campaign had directed ourmovements was manifestly smashed to bits. Mylius was of opinion that we could take a line westward and getback to England across the North Sea. He calculated that with such a motor barge as ours it would be possible toreach the Yorkshire coast within four−and−twenty hours. But this idea I overruled because of the shortness of ourprovisions, and more particularly because of our urgent need of water.
'Every boat we drew near now hailed us for water, and their demands did much to exasperate our thirst. I decidedthat if we went away to the south we should reach hilly country, or at least country that was not submerged, and
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
41


then we should be able to land, find some stream, drink, and get supplies and news. Many of the barges adrift inthe haze about us were filled with British soldiers and had floated up from the Nord See Canal, but none of themwere any better informed than ourselves of the course of events. "Orders" had, in fact, vanished out of the sky.
' "Orders" made a temporary reappearance late that evening in the form of a megaphone hail from a Britishtorpedo boat, announcing a truce, and giving the welcome information that food and water were being hurrieddown the Rhine and were to be found on the barge flotilla lying over the old Rhine above Leiden.' . . .
We will not follow Barnet, however, in the description of his strange overland voyage among trees and housesand churches by Zaandam and between Haarlem and Amsterdam, to Leiden. It was a voyage in a red−lit mist, in aworld of steamy silhouette, full of strange voices and perplexity, and with every other sensation dominated by afeverish thirst. 'We sat,' he says, 'in a little huddled group, saying very little, and the men forward were mere knotsof silent endurance. Our only continuing sound was the persistent mewing of a cat one of the men had rescuedfrom a floating hayrick near Zaandam. We kept a southward course by a watch−chain compass Mylius hadproduced....
'I do not think any of us felt we belonged to a defeated army, nor had we any strong sense of the war as thedominating fact about us. Our mental setting had far more of the effect of a huge natural catastrophe. The atomicbombs had dwarfed the international issues to complete insignificance. When our minds wandered from thepreoccupations of our immediate needs, we speculated upon the possibility of stopping the use of these frightfulexplosives before the world was utterly destroyed. For to us it seemed quite plain that these bombs and the stillgreater power of destruction of which they were the precursors might quite easily shatter every relationship andinstitution of mankind.
' "What will they be doing," asked Mylius, "what will they be doing? It's plain we've got to put an end to war. It'splain things have to be run some way. THIS−−all this−−is impossible."
'I made no immediate answer. Something−−I cannot think what−−had brought back to me the figure of that man Ihad seen wounded on the very first day of actual fighting. I saw again his angry, tearful eyes, and that poor,dripping, bloody mess that had been a skilful human hand five minutes before, thrust out in indignant protest."Damned foolery," he had stormed and sobbed, "damned foolery. My right hand, sir! My RIGHT hand. . . ."
'My faith had for a time gone altogether out of me. "I think we are too−−too silly," I said to Mylius, "ever to stopwar. If we'd had the sense to do it, we should have done it before this. I think this−−−−" I pointed to the gauntblack outline of a smashed windmill that stuck up, ridiculous and ugly, above the blood−lit waters−−"this is theend." '
### Section 10

But now our history must part company with Frederick Barnet and his barge−load of hungry and starving men.
For a time in western Europe at least it was indeed as if civilisation had come to a final collapse. These crowningbuds upon the tradition that Napoleon planted and Bismarck watered, opened and flared 'like waterlilies of flame'over nations destroyed, over churches smashed or submerged, towns ruined, fields lost to mankind for ever, and amillion weltering bodies. Was this lesson enough for mankind, or would the flames of war still burn amidst theruins?
Neither Barnet nor his companions, it is clear, had any assurance in their answers to that question. Already oncein the history of mankind, in America, before its discovery by the whites, an organised civilisation had given wayto a mere cult of warfare, specialised and cruel, and it seemed for a time to many a thoughtful man as if the wholeworld was but to repeat on a larger scale this ascendancy of the warrior, this triumph of the destructive instincts of
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
42


the race.
The subsequent chapters of Barnet's narrative do but supply body to this tragic possibility. He gives a series ofvignettes of civilisation, shattered, it seemed, almost irreparably. He found the Belgian hills swarming withrefugees and desolated by cholera; the vestiges of the contending armies keeping order under a truce, withoutactual battles, but with the cautious hostility of habit, and a great absence of plan everywhere.
Overhead aeroplanes went on mysterious errands, and there were rumours of cannibalism and hystericalfanaticisms in the valleys of the Semoy and the forest region of the eastern Ardennes. There was the report of anattack upon Russia by the Chinese and Japanese, and of some huge revolutionary outbreak in America. Theweather was stormier than men had ever known it in those regions, with much thunder and lightning and wildcloud−bursts of rain....
