## CHAPTER THE FIRST. THE NEW SOURCE OF ENERGY

### Section I

The problem which was already being mooted by such scientific men as Ramsay, Rutherford, and Soddy, in thevery beginning of the twentieth century, the problem of inducing radio−activity in the heavier elements and sotapping the internal energy of atoms, was solved by a wonderful combination of induction, intuition, and luck byHolsten so soon as the year 1933. From the first detection of radio−activity to its first subjugation to humanpurpose measured little more than a quarter of a century. For twenty years after that, indeed, minor difficultiesprevented any striking practical application of his success, but the essential thing was done, this new boundary inthe march of human progress was crossed, in that year. He set up atomic disintegration in a minute particle ofbismuth; it exploded with great violence into a heavy gas of extreme radio−activity, which disintegrated in its turnin the course of seven days, and it was only after another year's work that he was able to show practically that thelast result of this rapid release of energy was gold. But the thing was done−−at the cost of a blistered chest and aninjured finger, and from the moment when the invisible speck of bismuth flashed into riving and rending energy,Holsten knew that he had opened a way for mankind, however narrow and dark it might still be, to worlds oflimitless power. He recorded as much in the strange diary biography he left the world, a diary that was up to thatparticular moment a mass of speculations and calculations, and which suddenly became for a space an amazinglyminute and human record of sensations and emotions that all humanity might understand.
He gives, in broken phrases and often single words, it is true, but none the less vividly for that, a record of thetwenty−four hours following the demonstration of the correctness of his intricate tracery of computations andguesses. 'I thought I should not sleep,' he writes−−the words he omitted are supplied in brackets−−(on account of)'pain in (the) hand and chest and (the) wonder of what I had done.... Slept like a child.'
He felt strange and disconcerted the next morning; he had nothing to do, he was living alone in apartments inBloomsbury, and he decided to go up to Hampstead Heath, which he had known when he was a little boy as abreezy playground. He went up by the underground tube that was then the recognised means of travel from onepart of London to another, and walked up Heath Street from the tube station to the open heath. He found it a gullyof planks and scaffoldings between the hoardings of house−wreckers. The spirit of the times had seized upon thatnarrow, steep, and winding thoroughfare, and was in the act of making it commodious and interesting, accordingto the remarkable ideals of Neo−Georgian aestheticism. Such is the illogical quality of humanity that Holsten,fresh from work that was like a petard under the seat of current civilisation, saw these changes with regret. He hadcome up Heath Street perhaps a thousand times, had known the windows of all the little shops, spent hours in thevanished cinematograph theatre, and marvelled at the high−flung early Georgian houses upon the westward bankof that old gully of a thoroughfare; he felt strange with all these familiar things gone. He escaped at last with afeeling of relief from this choked alley of trenches and holes and cranes, and emerged upon the old familiar sceneabout the White Stone Pond. That, at least, was very much as it used to be.
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
11


There were still the fine old red−brick houses to left and right of him; the reservoir had been improved by aportico of marble, the white−fronted inn with the clustering flowers above its portico still stood out at the angle ofthe ways, and the blue view to Harrow Hill and Harrow spire, a view of hills and trees and shining waters andwind−driven cloud shadows, was like the opening of a great window to the ascending Londoner. All that was veryreassuring. There was the same strolling crowd, the same perpetual miracle of motors dodging through itharmlessly, escaping headlong into the country from the Sabbatical stuffiness behind and below them. There wasa band still, a women's suffrage meeting−−for the suffrage women had won their way back to the tolerance, atrifle derisive, of the populace again−−socialist orators, politicians, a band, and the same wild uproar of dogs,frantic with the gladness of their one blessed weekly release from the back yard and the chain. And away alongthe road to the Spaniards strolled a vast multitude, saying, as ever, that the view of London was exceptionallyclear that day.
Young Holsten's face was white. He walked with that uneasy affectation of ease that marks an overstrainednervous system and an under−exercised body. He hesitated at the White Stone Pond whether to go to the left of itor the right, and again at the fork of the roads. He kept shifting his stick in his hand, and every now and then hewould get in the way of people on the footpath or be jostled by them because of the uncertainty of his movements.He felt, he confesses, 'inadequate to ordinary existence.' He seemed to himself to be something inhuman andmischievous. All the people about him looked fairly prosperous, fairly happy, fairly well adapted to the lives theyhad to lead−−a week of work and a Sunday of best clothes and mild promenading−−and he had launchedsomething that would disorganise the entire fabric that held their contentments and ambitions and satisfactionstogether. 'Felt like an imbecile who has presented a box full of loaded revolvers to a Creche,' he notes.
He met a man named Lawson, an old school−fellow, of whom history now knows only that he was red−faced andhad a terrier. He and Holsten walked together and Holsten was sufficiently pale and jumpy for Lawson to tell himhe overworked and needed a holiday. They sat down at a little table outside the County Council house of GoldersHill Park and sent one of the waiters to the Bull and Bush for a couple of bottles of beer, no doubt at Lawson'ssuggestion. The beer warmed Holsten's rather dehumanised system. He began to tell Lawson as clearly as hecould to what his great discovery amounted. Lawson feigned attention, but indeed he had neither the knowledgenor the imagination to understand. 'In the end, before many years are out, this must eventually change war, transit,lighting, building, and every sort of manufacture, even agriculture, every material human concern−−−−'
Then Holsten stopped short. Lawson had leapt to his feet. 'Damn that dog!' cried Lawson. 'Look at it now. Hi!Here! Phewoo−−phewoo phewoo! Come HERE, Bobs! Come HERE!'
The young scientific man, with his bandaged hand, sat at the green table, too tired to convey the wonder of thething he had sought so long, his friend whistled and bawled for his dog, and the Sunday people drifted about themthrough the spring sunshine. For a moment or so Holsten stared at Lawson in astonishment, for he had been toointent upon what he had been saying to realise how little Lawson had attended.
Then he remarked, 'WELL!' and smiled faintly, and−−finished the tankard of beer before him.
Lawson sat down again. 'One must look after one's dog,' he said, with a note of apology. 'What was it you weretelling me?'
### Section 2

In the evening Holsten went out again. He walked to Saint Paul's Cathedral, and stood for a time near the doorlistening to the evening service. The candles upon the altar reminded him in some odd way of the fireflies atFiesole. Then he walked back through the evening lights to Westminster. He was oppressed, he was indeedscared, by his sense of the immense consequences of his discovery. He had a vague idea that night that he oughtnot to publish his results, that they were premature, that some secret association of wise men should take care of
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
12


his work and hand it on from generation to generation until the world was riper for its practical application. Hefelt that nobody in all the thousands of people he passed had really awakened to the fact of change, they trustedthe world for what it was, not to alter too rapidly, to respect their trusts, their assurances, their habits, their littleaccustomed traffics and hard−won positions.
He went into those little gardens beneath the over−hanging, brightly−lit masses of the Savoy Hotel and the HotelCecil. He sat down on a seat and became aware of the talk of the two people next to him. It was the talk of ayoung couple evidently on the eve of marriage. The man was congratulating himself on having regularemployment at last; 'they like me,' he said, 'and I like the job. If I work up−−in'r dozen years or so I ought to begettin' somethin' pretty comfortable. That's the plain sense of it, Hetty. There ain't no reason whatsoever why weshouldn't get along very decently−−very decently indeed.'
The desire for little successes amidst conditions securely fixed! So it struck upon Holsten's mind. He added in hisdiary, 'I had a sense of all this globe as that....'
By that phrase he meant a kind of clairvoyant vision of this populated world as a whole, of all its cities and townsand villages, its high roads and the inns beside them, its gardens and farms and upland pastures, its boatmen andsailors, its ships coming along the great circles of the ocean, its time−tables and appointments and payments anddues as it were one unified and progressive spectacle. Sometimes such visions came to him; his mind, accustomedto great generalisations and yet acutely sensitive to detail, saw things far more comprehensively than the minds ofmost of his contemporaries. Usually the teeming sphere moved on to its predestined ends and circled with astately swiftness on its path about the sun. Usually it was all a living progress that altered under his regard. Butnow fatigue a little deadened him to that incessancy of life, it seemed now just an eternal circling. He lapsed to thecommoner persuasion of the great fixities and recurrencies of the human routine. The remoter past of wanderingsavagery, the inevitable changes of to−morrow were veiled, and he saw only day and night, seed−time andharvest, loving and begetting, births and deaths, walks in the summer sunlight and tales by the winter fireside, theancient sequence of hope and acts and age perennially renewed, eddying on for ever and ever, save that now theimpious hand of research was raised to overthrow this drowsy, gently humming, habitual, sunlit spinning−top ofman's existence....
For a time he forgot wars and crimes and hates and persecutions, famine and pestilence, the cruelties of beasts,weariness and the bitter wind, failure and insufficiency and retrocession. He saw all mankind in terms of thehumble Sunday couple upon the seat beside him, who schemed their inglorious outlook and improbablecontentments. 'I had a sense of all this globe as that.'
His intelligence struggled against this mood and struggled for a time in vain. He reassured himself against theinvasion of this disconcerting idea that he was something strange and inhuman, a loose wanderer from the flockreturning with evil gifts from his sustained unnatural excursions amidst the darknesses and phosphorescencesbeneath the fair surfaces of life. Man had not been always thus; the instincts and desires of the little home, thelittle plot, was not all his nature; also he was an adventurer, an experimenter, an unresting curiosity, an insatiabledesire. For a few thousand generations indeed he had tilled the earth and followed the seasons, saying his prayers,grinding his corn and trampling the October winepress, yet not for so long but that he was still full of restlessstirrings.
'If there have been home and routine and the field,' thought Holsten, 'there have also been wonder and the sea.'
He turned his head and looked up over the back of the seat at the great hotels above him, full of softly shadedlights and the glow and colour and stir of feasting. Might his gift to mankind mean simply more of that? . . .
He got up and walked out of the garden, surveyed a passing tram−car, laden with warm light, against the deepblues of evening, dripping and trailing long skirts of shining reflection; he crossed the Embankment and stood for
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
13


a time watching the dark river and turning ever and again to the lit buildings and bridges. His mind began toscheme conceivable replacements of all those clustering arrangements. . . .
'It has begun,' he writes in the diary in which these things are recorded. 'It is not for me to reach out toconsequences I cannot foresee. I am a part, not a whole; I am a little instrument in the armoury of Change. If Iwere to burn all these papers, before a score of years had passed, some other man would be doing this. . .
### Section 3

Holsten, before he died, was destined to see atomic energy dominating every other source of power, but for someyears yet a vast network of difficulties in detail and application kept the new discovery from any effectiveinvasion of ordinary life. The path from the laboratory to the workshop is sometimes a tortuous one;electro−magnetic radiations were known and demonstrated for twenty years before Marconi made thempractically available, and in the same way it was twenty years before induced radio−activity could be brought topractical utilisation. The thing, of course, was discussed very much, more perhaps at the time of its discovery thanduring the interval of technical adaptation, but with very little realisation of the huge economic revolution thatimpended. What chiefly impressed the journalists of 1933 was the production of gold from bismuth and therealisation albeit upon unprofitable lines of the alchemist's dreams; there was a considerable amount of discussionand expectation in that more intelligent section of the educated publics of the various civilised countries whichfollowed scientific development; but for the most part the world went about its business−−as the inhabitants ofthose Swiss villages which live under the perpetual threat of overhanging rocks and mountains go about theirbusiness−−just as though the possible was impossible, as though the inevitable was postponed for ever because itwas delayed.
It was in 1953 that the first Holsten−Roberts engine brought induced radio−activity into the sphere of industrialproduction, and its first general use was to replace the steam−engine in electrical generating stations. Hard uponthe appearance of this came the Dass−Tata engine−−the invention of two among the brilliant galaxy of Bengaliinventors the modernisation of Indian thought was producing at this time−−which was used chiefly forautomobiles, aeroplanes, waterplanes, and such−like, mobile purposes. The American Kemp engine, differingwidely in principle but equally practicable, and the Krupp−Erlanger came hard upon the heels of this, and by theautumn of 1954 a gigantic replacement of industrial methods and machinery was in progress all about thehabitable globe. Small wonder was this when the cost, even of these earliest and clumsiest of atomic engines, iscompared with that of the power they superseded. Allowing for lubrication the Dass−Tata engine, once it wasstarted cost a penny to run thirty−seven miles, and added only nine and quarter pounds to the weight of thecarriage it drove. It made the heavy alcohol−driven automobile of the time ridiculous in appearance as well aspreposterously costly. For many years the price of coal and every form of liquid fuel had been clambering tolevels that made even the revival of the draft horse seem a practicable possibility, and now with the abruptrelaxation of this stringency, the change in appearance of the traffic upon the world's roads was instantaneous. Inthree years the frightful armoured monsters that had hooted and smoked and thundered about the world for fourawful decades were swept away to the dealers in old metal, and the highways thronged with light and clean andshimmering shapes of silvered steel. At the same time a new impetus was given to aviation by the relativelyenormous power for weight of the atomic engine, it was at last possible to add Redmayne's ingenious helicopterascent and descent engine to the vertical propeller that had hitherto been the sole driving force of the aeroplanewithout overweighting the machine, and men found themselves possessed of an instrument of flight that couldhover or ascend or descend vertically and gently as well as rush wildly through the air. The last dread of flyingvanished. As the journalists of the time phrased it, this was the epoch of the Leap into the Air. The new atomicaeroplane became indeed a mania; every one of means was frantic to possess a thing so controllable, so secureand so free from the dust and danger of the road, and in France alone in the year 1943 thirty thousand of thesenew aeroplanes were manufactured and licensed, and soared humming softly into the sky.
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
14


And with an equal speed atomic engines of various types invaded industrialism. The railways paid enormouspremiums for priority in the delivery of atomic traction engines, atomic smelting was embarked upon so eagerlyas to lead to a number of disastrous explosions due to inexperienced handling of the new power, and therevolutionary cheapening of both materials and electricity made the entire reconstruction of domestic buildings amatter merely dependent upon a reorganisation of the methods of the builder and the house−furnisher. Viewedfrom the side of the new power and from the point of view of those who financed and manufactured the newengines and material it required the age of the Leap into the Air was one of astonishing prosperity. Patent−holdingcompanies were presently paying dividends of five or six hundred per cent. and enormous fortunes were madeand fantastic wages earned by all who were concerned in the new developments. This prosperity was not a littleenhanced by the fact that in both the Dass−Tata and Holsten−Roberts engines one of the recoverable wasteproducts was gold−−the former disintegrated dust of bismuth and the latter dust of lead−−and that this new supplyof gold led quite naturally to a rise in prices throughout the world.
This spectacle of feverish enterprise was productivity, this crowding flight of happy and fortunate richpeople−−every great city was as if a crawling ant−hill had suddenly taken wing−−was the bright side of theopening phase of the new epoch in human history. Beneath that brightness was a gathering darkness, a deepeningdismay. If there was a vast development of production there was also a huge destruction of values. These glaringfactories working night and day, these glittering new vehicles swinging noiselessly along the roads, these flightsof dragon−flies that swooped and soared and circled in the air, were indeed no more than the brightnesses oflamps and fires that gleam out when the world sinks towards twilight and the night. Between these high lightsaccumulated disaster, social catastrophe. The coal mines were manifestly doomed to closure at no very distantdate, the vast amount of capital invested in oil was becoming unsaleable, millions of coal miners, steel workersupon the old lines, vast swarms of unskilled or under−skilled labourers in innumerable occupations, were beingflung out of employment by the superior efficiency of the new machinery, the rapid fall in the cost of transit wasdestroying high land values at every centre of population, the value of existing house property had becomeproblematical, gold was undergoing headlong depreciation, all the securities upon which the credit of the worldrested were slipping and sliding, banks were tottering, the stock exchanges were scenes of feverish panic;−−thiswas the reverse of the spectacle, these were the black and monstrous under−consequences of the Leap into the### Air.

There is a story of a demented London stockbroker running out into Threadneedle Street and tearing off hisclothes as he ran. 'The Steel Trust is scrapping the whole of its plant,' he shouted. 'The State Railways are going toscrap all their engines. Everything's going to be scrapped−−everything. Come and scrap the mint, you fellows,come and scrap the mint!'
In the year 1955 the suicide rate for the United States of America quadrupled any previous record. There was anenormous increase also in violent crime throughout the world. The thing had come upon an unprepared humanity;it seemed as though human society was to be smashed by its own magnificent gains.
For there had been no foresight of these things. There had been no attempt anywhere even to compute theprobable dislocations this flood of inexpensive energy would produce in human affairs. The world in these dayswas not really governed at all, in the sense in which government came to be understood in subsequent years.Government was a treaty, not a design; it was forensic, conservative, disputatious, unseeing, unthinking,uncreative; throughout the world, except where the vestiges of absolutism still sheltered the court favourite andthe trusted servant, it was in the hands of the predominant caste of lawyers, who had an enormous advantage inbeing the only trained caste. Their professional education and every circumstance in the manipulation of thefantastically naive electoral methods by which they clambered to power, conspired to keep them contemptuous offacts, conscientiously unimaginative, alert to claim and seize advantages and suspicious of every generosity.Government was an obstructive business of energetic fractions, progress went on outside of and in spite of publicactivities, and legislation was the last crippling recognition of needs so clamorous and imperative and facts soaggressively established as to invade even the dingy seclusions of the judges and threaten the very existence of
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
15


the otherwise inattentive political machine.
The world was so little governed that with the very coming of plenty, in the full tide of an incalculable abundance,when everything necessary to satisfy human needs and everything necessary to realise such will and purpose asexisted then in human hearts was already at hand, one has still to tell of hardship, famine, anger, confusion,conflict, and incoherent suffering. There was no scheme for the distribution of this vast new wealth that had comeat last within the reach of men; there was no clear conception that any such distribution was possible. As oneattempts a comprehensive view of those opening years of the new age, as one measures it against the latentachievement that later years have demonstrated, one begins to measure the blindness, the narrowness, theinsensate unimaginative individualism of the pre−atomic time. Under this tremendous dawn of power andfreedom, under a sky ablaze with promise, in the very presence of science standing like some bountiful goddessover all the squat darknesses of human life, holding patiently in her strong arms, until men chose to take them,security, plenty, the solution of riddles, the key of the bravest adventures, in her very presence, and with theearnest of her gifts in court, the world was to witness such things as the squalid spectacle of the Dass−Tata patentlitigation.
There in a stuffy court in London, a grimy oblong box of a room, during the exceptional heat of the May of 1956,the leading counsel of the day argued and shouted over a miserable little matter of more royalties or less andwhether the Dass−Tata company might not bar the Holsten−Roberts' methods of utilising the new power. TheDass−Tata people were indeed making a strenuous attempt to secure a world monopoly in atomic engineering.The judge, after the manner of those times, sat raised above the court, wearing a preposterous gown and a foolishhuge wig, the counsel also wore dirty−looking little wigs and queer black gowns over their usual costume, wigsand gowns that were held to be necessary to their pleading, and upon unclean wooden benches stirred andwhispered artful−looking solicitors, busily scribbling reporters, the parties to the case, expert witnesses, interestedpeople, and a jostling confusion of subpoenaed persons, briefless young barristers (forming a style on the mostesteemed and truculent examples) and casual eccentric spectators who preferred this pit of iniquity to the freesunlight outside. Every one was damply hot, the examining King's Counsel wiped the perspiration from his huge,clean−shaven upper lip; and into this atmosphere of grasping contention and human exhalations the daylightfiltered through a window that was manifestly dirty. The jury sat in a double pew to the left of the judge, lookingas uncomfortable as frogs that have fallen into an ash−pit, and in the witness−box lied the would−be omnivorousDass, under cross−examination....
Holsten had always been accustomed to publish his results so soon as they appeared to him to be sufficientlyadvanced to furnish a basis for further work, and to that confiding disposition and one happy flash of adaptiveinvention the alert Dass owed his claim....
But indeed a vast multitude of such sharp people were clutching, patenting, pre−empting, monopolising this orthat feature of the new development, seeking to subdue this gigantic winged power to the purposes of their littlelusts and avarice. That trial is just one of innumerable disputes of the same kind. For a time the face of the worldfestered with patent legislation. It chanced, however, to have one oddly dramatic feature in the fact that Holsten,after being kept waiting about the court for two days as a beggar might have waited at a rich man's door, afterbeing bullied by ushers and watched by policemen, was called as a witness, rather severely handled by counsel,and told not to 'quibble' by the judge when he was trying to be absolutely explicit.
The judge scratched his nose with a quill pen, and sneered at Holsten's astonishment round the corner of hismonstrous wig. Holsten was a great man, was he? Well, in a law−court great men were put in their places.
'We want to know has the plaintiff added anything to this or hasn't he?' said the judge, 'we don't want to have yourviews whether Sir Philip Dass's improvements were merely superficial adaptations or whether they were implicitin your paper. No doubt−−after the manner of inventors−−you think most things that were ever likely to bediscovered are implicit in your papers. No doubt also you think too that most subsequent additions and
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
16


modifications are merely superficial. Inventors have a way of thinking that. The law isn't concerned with that sortof thing. The law has nothing to do with the vanity of inventors. The law is concerned with the question whetherthese patent rights have the novelty the plantiff claims for them. What that admission may or may not stop, and allthese other things you are saying in your overflowing zeal to answer more than the questions addressed toyou−−none of these things have anything whatever to do with the case in hand. It is a matter of constantastonishment to me in this court to see how you scientific men, with all your extraordinary claims to precision andveracity, wander and wander so soon as you get into the witness−box. I know no more unsatisfactory class ofwitness. The plain and simple question is, has Sir Philip Dass made any real addition to existing knowledge andmethods in this matter or has he not? We don't want to know whether they were large or small additions nor whatthe consequences of your admission may be. That you will leave to us.'
Holsten was silent.
'Surely?' said the judge, almost pityingly.
'No, he hasn't,' said Holsten, perceiving that for once in his life he must disregard infinitesimals.
'Ah!' said the judge, 'now why couldn't you say that when counsel put the question? . . .'
An entry in Holsten's diary−autobiography, dated five days later, runs: 'Still amazed. The law is the mostdangerous thing in this country. It is hundreds of years old. It hasn't an idea. The oldest of old bottles and this newwine, the most explosive wine. Something will overtake them.'
### Section 4

There was a certain truth in Holsten's assertion that the law was 'hundreds of years old.' It was, in relation tocurrent thought and widely accepted ideas, an archaic thing. While almost all the material and methods of life hadbeen changing rapidly and were now changing still more rapidly, the law−courts and the legislatures of the worldwere struggling desperately to meet modern demands with devices and procedures, conceptions of rights andproperty and authority and obligation that dated from the rude compromises of relatively barbaric times. Thehorse−hair wigs and antic dresses of the British judges, their musty courts and overbearing manners, were indeedonly the outward and visible intimations of profounder anachronisms. The legal and political organisation of theearth in the middle twentieth century was indeed everywhere like a complicated garment, outworn yet strong, thatnow fettered the governing body that once it had protected.
Yet that same spirit of free−thinking and outspoken publication that in the field of natural science had been thebeginning of the conquest of nature, was at work throughout all the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries preparingthe spirit of the new world within the degenerating body of the old. The idea of a greater subordination ofindividual interests and established institutions to the collective future, is traceable more and more clearly in theliterature of those times, and movement after movement fretted itself away in criticism of and opposition to firstthis aspect and then that of the legal, social, and political order. Already in the early nineteenth century Shelley,with no scrap of alternative, is denouncing the established rulers of the world as Anarchs, and the entire system ofideas and suggestions that was known as Socialism, and more particularly its international side, feeble as it was increative proposals or any method of transition, still witnesses to the growth of a conception of a modernisedsystem of inter−relationships that should supplant the existing tangle of proprietary legal ideas.
The word 'Sociology' was invented by Herbert Spencer, a popular writer upon philosophical subjects, whoflourished about the middle of the nineteenth century, but the idea of a state, planned as an electric−tractionsystem is planned, without reference to pre−existing apparatus, upon scientific lines, did not take a very stronghold upon the popular imagination of the world until the twentieth century. Then, the growing impatience of theAmerican people with the monstrous and socially paralysing party systems that had sprung out of their absurd
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
17


electoral arrangements, led to the appearance of what came to be called the 'Modern State' movement, and agalaxy of brilliant writers, in America, Europe, and the East, stirred up the world to the thought of bolderrearrangements of social interaction, property, employment, education, and government, than had ever beencontemplated before. No doubt these Modern State ideas were very largely the reflection upon social and politicalthought of the vast revolution in material things that had been in progress for two hundred years, but for a longtime they seemed to be having no more influence upon existing institutions than the writings of Rousseau andVoltaire seemed to have had at the time of the death of the latter. They were fermenting in men's minds, and itneeded only just such social and political stresses as the coming of the atomic mechanisms brought about, tothrust them forward abruptly into crude and startling realisation.
### Section 5

Frederick Barnet's Wander Jahre is one of those autobiographical novels that were popular throughout the thirdand fourth decades of the twentieth century. It was published in 1970, and one must understand Wander Jahrerather in a spiritual and intellectual than in a literal sense. It is indeed an allusive title, carrying the world back tothe Wilhelm Meister of Goethe, a century and a half earlier.
Its author, Frederick Barnet, gives a minute and curious history of his life and ideas between his nineteenth andhis twenty−third birthdays. He was neither a very original nor a very brilliant man, but he had a trick ofcircumstantial writing; and though no authentic portrait was to survive for the information of posterity, he betraysby a score of casual phrases that he was short, sturdy, inclined to be plump, with a 'rather blobby' face, and full,rather projecting blue eyes. He belonged until the financial debacle of 1956 to the class of fairly prosperouspeople, he was a student in London, he aeroplaned to Italy and then had a pedestrian tour from Genoa to Rome,crossed in the air to Greece and Egypt, and came back over the Balkans and Germany. His family fortunes, whichwere largely invested in bank shares, coal mines, and house property, were destroyed. Reduced to penury, hesought to earn a living. He suffered great hardship, and was then caught up by the war and had a year ofsoldiering, first as an officer in the English infantry and then in the army of pacification. His book tells all thesethings so simply and at the same time so explicitly, that it remains, as it were, an eye by which future generationsmay have at least one man's vision of the years of the Great Change.
And he was, he tells us, a 'Modern State' man 'by instinct' from the beginning. He breathed in these ideas in theclass rooms and laboratories of the Carnegie Foundation school that rose, a long and delicately beautiful facade,along the South Bank of the Thames opposite the ancient dignity of Somerset House. Such thought wasinterwoven with the very fabric of that pioneer school in the educational renascence in England. After thecustomary exchange years in Heidelberg and Paris, he went into the classical school of London University. Theolder so−called 'classical' education of the British pedagogues, probably the most paralysing, ineffective, andfoolish routine that ever wasted human life, had already been swept out of this great institution in favour ofmodern methods; and he learnt Greek and Latin as well as he had learnt German, Spanish, and French, so that hewrote and spoke them freely, and used them with an unconscious ease in his study of the foundation civilisationsof the European system to which they were the key. (This change was still so recent that he mentions an encounterin Rome with an 'Oxford don' who 'spoke Latin with a Wiltshire accent and manifest discomfort, wrote Greekletters with his tongue out, and seemed to think a Greek sentence a charm when it was a quotation and animpropriety when it wasn't.')
Barnet saw the last days of the coal−steam engines upon the English railways and the gradual cleansing of theLondon atmosphere as the smoke−creating sea−coal fires gave place to electric heating. The building oflaboratories at Kensington was still in progress, and he took part in the students' riots that delayed the removal ofthe Albert Memorial. He carried a banner with 'We like Funny Statuary' on one side, and on the other 'Seats andCanopies for Statues, Why should our Great Departed Stand in the Rain?' He learnt the rather athletic aviation ofthose days at the University grounds at Sydenham, and he was fined for flying over the new prison for politicallibellers at Wormwood Scrubs, 'in a manner calculated to exhilarate the prisoners while at exercise.' That was the
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
18


time of the attempted suppression of any criticism of the public judicature and the place was crowded withjournalists who had ventured to call attention to the dementia of Chief Justice Abrahams. Barnet was not a verygood aviator, he confesses he was always a little afraid of his machine−−there was excellent reason for every oneto be afraid of those clumsy early types−−and he never attempted steep descents or very high flying. He also, herecords, owned one of those oil−driven motor−bicycles whose clumsy complexity and extravagant filthiness stillastonish the visitors to the museum of machinery at South Kensington. He mentions running over a dog andcomplains of the ruinous price of 'spatchcocks' in Surrey. 'Spatchcocks,' it seems, was a slang term for crushedhens.
He passed the examinations necessary to reduce his military service to a minimum, and his want of any specialscientific or technical qualification and a certain precocious corpulence that handicapped his aviation indicatedthe infantry of the line as his sphere of training. That was the most generalised form of soldiering. Thedevelopment of the theory of war had been for some decades but little assisted by any practical experience. Whatfighting had occurred in recent years, had been fighting in minor or uncivilised states, with peasant or barbaricsoldiers and with but a small equipment of modern contrivances, and the great powers of the world were contentfor the most part to maintain armies that sustained in their broader organisation the traditions of the Europeanwars of thirty and forty years before. There was the infantry arm to which Barnet belonged and which wassupposed to fight on foot with a rifle and be the main portion of the army. There were cavalry forces (horsesoldiers), having a ratio to the infantry that had been determined by the experiences of the Franco−German war in# 1871. There was also artillery, and for some unexplained reason much of this was still drawn by horses; though
there were also in all the European armies a small number of motor−guns with wheels so constructed that theycould go over broken ground. In addition there were large developments of the engineering arm, concerned withmotor transport, motor−bicycle scouting, aviation, and the like.
No first−class intelligence had been sought to specialise in and work out the problem of warfare with the newappliances and under modern conditions, but a succession of able jurists, Lord Haldane, Chief Justice Briggs, andthat very able King's Counsel, Philbrick, had reconstructed the army frequently and thoroughly and placed it atlast, with the adoption of national service, upon a footing that would have seemed very imposing to the public of# 1900. At any moment the British Empire could now put a million and a quarter of arguable soldiers upon the
board of Welt−Politik. The traditions of Japan and the Central European armies were more princely and lessforensic; the Chinese still refused resolutely to become a military power, and maintained a small standing armyupon the American model that was said, so far as it went, to be highly efficient, and Russia, secured by a stringentadministration against internal criticism, had scarcely altered the design of a uniform or the organisation of abattery since the opening decades of the century. Barnet's opinion of his military training was manifestly a poorone, his Modern State ideas disposed him to regard it as a bore, and his common sense condemned it as useless.Moreover, his habit of body made him peculiarly sensitive to the fatigues and hardships of service.
'For three days in succession we turned out before dawn and−−for no earthly reason−−without breakfast,' herelates. 'I suppose that is to show us that when the Day comes the first thing will be to get us thoroughlyuncomfortable and rotten. We then proceeded to Kriegspiel, according to the mysterious ideas of those inauthority over us. On the last day we spent three hours under a hot if early sun getting over eight miles of countryto a point we could have reached in a motor omnibus in nine minutes and a half−−I did it the next day inthat−−and then we made a massed attack upon entrenchments that could have shot us all about three times over ifonly the umpires had let them. Then came a little bayonet exercise, but I doubt if I am sufficiently a barbarian tostick this long knife into anything living. Anyhow in this battle I shouldn't have had a chance. Assuming that bysome miracle I hadn't been shot three times over, I was far too hot and blown when I got up to the entrenchmentseven to lift my beastly rifle. It was those others would have begun the sticking....
'For a time we were watched by two hostile aeroplanes; then our own came up and asked them not to, and−−thepractice of aerial warfare still being unknown−−they very politely desisted and went away and did dives andcircles of the most charming description over the Fox Hills.'
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
19


All Barnet's accounts of his military training were written in the same half−contemptuous, half−protesting tone.He was of opinion that his chances of participating in any real warfare were very slight, and that, if after all heshould participate, it was bound to be so entirely different from these peace manoeuvres that his only course as arational man would be to keep as observantly out of danger as he could until he had learnt the tricks andpossibilities of the new conditions. He states this quite frankly. Never was a man more free from sham heroics.
### Section 6

Barnet welcomed the appearance of the atomic engine with the zest of masculine youth in all fresh machinery,and it is evident that for some time he failed to connect the rush of wonderful new possibilities with the financialtroubles of his family. 'I knew my father was worried,' he admits. That cast the smallest of shadows upon hisdelighted departure for Italy and Greece and Egypt with three congenial companions in one of the new atomicmodels. They flew over the Channel Isles and Touraine, he mentions, and circled about Mont Blanc−−'These newhelicopters, we found,' he notes, 'had abolished all the danger and strain of sudden drops to which the old−timeaeroplanes were liable'−−and then he went on by way of Pisa, Paestum, Ghirgenti, and Athens, to visit thepyramids by moonlight, flying thither from Cairo, and to follow the Nile up to Khartum. Even by later standards,it must have been a very gleeful holiday for a young man, and it made the tragedy of his next experiences all thedarker. A week after his return his father, who was a widower, announced himself ruined, and committed suicideby means of an unscheduled opiate.
At one blow Barnet found himself flung out of the possessing, spending, enjoying class to which he belonged,penniless and with no calling by which he could earn a living. He tried teaching and some journalism, but in alittle while he found himself on the underside of a world in which he had always reckoned to live in the sunshine.For innumerable men such an experience has meant mental and spiritual destruction, but Barnet, in spite of hisbodily gravitation towards comfort, showed himself when put to the test, of the more valiant modern quality. Hewas saturated with the creative stoicism of the heroic times that were already dawning, and he took his difficultiesand discomforts stoutly as his appointed material, and turned them to expression.
Indeed, in his book, he thanks fortune for them. 'I might have lived and died,' he says, 'in that neat fool's paradiseof secure lavishness above there. I might never have realised the gathering wrath and sorrow of the ousted andexasperated masses. In the days of my own prosperity things had seemed to me to be very well arranged.' Nowfrom his new point of view he was to find they were not arranged at all; that government was a compromise ofaggressions and powers and lassitudes, and law a convention between interests, and that the poor and the weak,though they had many negligent masters, had few friends.
'I had thought things were looked after,' he wrote. 'It was with a kind of amazement that I tramped the roads andstarved−−and found that no one in particular cared.'
He was turned out of his lodging in a backward part of London.
'It was with difficulty I persuaded my landlady−−she was a needy widow, poor soul, and I was already in herdebt−−to keep an old box for me in which I had locked a few letters, keepsakes, and the like. She lived in greatfear of the Public Health and Morality Inspectors, because she was sometimes too poor to pay the customary tip tothem, but at last she consented to put it in a dark tiled place under the stairs, and then I went forth into theworld−−to seek first the luck of a meal and then shelter.'
He wandered down into the thronging gayer parts of London, in which a year or so ago he had been numberedamong the spenders.
London, under the Visible Smoke Law, by which any production of visible smoke with or without excuse waspunishable by a fine, had already ceased to be the sombre smoke−darkened city of the Victorian time; it had been,
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
20


and indeed was, constantly being rebuilt, and its main streets were already beginning to take on thosecharacteristics that distinguished them throughout the latter half of the twentieth century. The insanitary horse andthe plebeian bicycle had been banished from the roadway, which was now of a resilient, glass−like surface,spotlessly clean; and the foot passenger was restricted to a narrow vestige of the ancient footpath on either side ofthe track and forbidden at the risk of a fine, if he survived, to cross the roadway. People descended from theirautomobiles upon this pavement and went through the lower shops to the lifts and stairs to the new ways forpedestrians, the Rows, that ran along the front of the houses at the level of the first story, and, being joined byfrequent bridges, gave the newer parts of London a curiously Venetian appearance. In some streets there wereupper and even third−story Rows. For most of the day and all night the shop windows were lit by electric light,and many establishments had made, as it were, canals of public footpaths through their premises in order toincrease their window space.
Barnet made his way along this night−scene rather apprehensively since the police had power to challenge anddemand the Labour Card of any indigent−looking person, and if the record failed to show he was in employment,dismiss him to the traffic pavement below.
But there was still enough of his former gentility about Barnet's appearance and bearing to protect him from this;the police, too, had other things to think of that night, and he was permitted to reach the galleries about LeicesterSquare−−that great focus of London life and pleasure.
He gives a vivid description of the scene that evening. In the centre was a garden raised on arches lit by festoonsof lights and connected with the Rows by eight graceful bridges, beneath which hummed the interlacing streamsof motor traffic, pulsating as the current alternated between east and west and north and south. Above rose greatfrontages of intricate rather than beautiful reinforced porcelain, studded with lights, barred by bold illuminatedadvertisements, and glowing with reflections. There were the two historical music halls of this place, theShakespeare Memorial Theatre, in which the municipal players revolved perpetually through the cycle ofShakespeare's plays, and four other great houses of refreshment and entertainment whose pinnacles streamed upinto the blue obscurity of the night. The south side of the square was in dark contrast to the others; it was stillbeing rebuilt, and a lattice of steel bars surmounted by the frozen gestures of monstrous cranes rose over theexcavated sites of vanished Victorian buildings.
This framework attracted Barnet's attention for a time to the exclusion of other interests. It was absolutely still, ithad a dead rigidity, a stricken inaction, no one was at work upon it and all its machinery was quiet; but theconstructor's globes of vacuum light filled its every interstice with a quivering green moonshine and showed alertbut motionless−−soldier sentinels!
He asked a passing stroller, and was told that the men had struck that day against the use of an atomic riveter thatwould have doubled the individual efficiency and halved the number of steel workers.
'Shouldn't wonder if they didn't get chucking bombs,' said Barnet's informant, hovered for a moment, and thenwent on his way to the Alhambra music hall.
Barnet became aware of an excitement in the newspaper kiosks at the corners of the square. Something verysensational had been flashed upon the transparencies. Forgetting for a moment his penniless condition, he madehis way over a bridge to buy a paper, for in those days the papers, which were printed upon thin sheets of metallicfoil, were sold at determinate points by specially licensed purveyors. Half over, he stopped short at a change inthe traffic below; and was astonished to see that the police signals were restricting vehicles to the half roadway.When presently he got within sight of the transparencies that had replaced the placards of Victorian times, he readof the Great March of the Unemployed that was already in progress through the West End, and so withoutexpenditure he was able to understand what was coming.
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
21


He watched, and his book describes this procession which the police had considered it unwise to prevent andwhich had been spontaneously organised in imitation of the Unemployed Processions of earlier times. He hadexpected a mob but there was a kind of sullen discipline about the procession when at last it arrived. What seemedfor a time an unending column of men marched wearily, marched with a kind of implacable futility, along theroadway underneath him. He was, he says, moved to join them, but instead he remained watching. They were adingy, shabby, ineffective−looking multitude, for the most part incapable of any but obsolete and supersededtypes of labour. They bore a few banners with the time−honoured inscription: 'Work, not Charity,' but otherwisetheir ranks were unadorned.
They were not singing, they were not even talking, there was nothing truculent nor aggressive in their bearing,they had no definite objective they were just marching and showing themselves in the more prosperous parts ofLondon. They were a sample of that great mass of unskilled cheap labour which the now still cheaper mechanicalpowers had superseded for evermore. They were being 'scrapped'−−as horses had been 'scrapped.'
Barnet leant over the parapet watching them, his mind quickened by his own precarious condition. For a time, hesays, he felt nothing but despair at the sight; what should be done, what could be done for this gathering surplus ofhumanity? They were so manifestly useless−−and incapable−−and pitiful.
What were they asking for?
They had been overtaken by unexpected things. Nobody had foreseen−−−−
It flashed suddenly into his mind just what the multitudinous shambling enigma below meant. It was an appealagainst the unexpected, an appeal to those others who, more fortunate, seemed wiser and more powerful, forsomething−−for INTELLIGENCE. This mute mass, weary footed, rank following rank, protested its persuasionthat some of these others must have foreseen these dislocations−−that anyhow they ought to have foreseen−−andarranged.
That was what this crowd of wreckage was feeling and seeking so dumbly to assert.
'Things came to me like the turning on of a light in a darkened room,' he says. 'These men were praying to theirfellow creatures as once they prayed to God! The last thing that men will realise about anything is that it isinanimate. They had transferred their animation to mankind. They still believed there was intelligencesomewhere, even if it was careless or malignant.... It had only to be aroused to be conscience−stricken, to bemoved to exertion.... And I saw, too, that as yet THERE WAS NO SUCH INTELLIGENCE. The world waits forintelligence. That intelligence has still to be made, that will for good and order has still to be gathered together,out of scraps of impulse and wandering seeds of benevolence and whatever is fine and creative in our souls, into acommon purpose. It's something still to come....'
It is characteristic of the widening thought of the time that this not very heroical young man who, in any previousage, might well have been altogether occupied with the problem of his own individual necessities, should be ableto stand there and generalise about the needs of the race.
But upon all the stresses and conflicts of that chaotic time there was already dawning the light of a new era. Thespirit of humanity was escaping, even then it was escaping, from its extreme imprisonment in individuals.Salvation from the bitter intensities of self, which had been a conscious religious end for thousands of years,which men had sought in mortifications, in the wilderness, in meditation, and by innumerable strange paths, wascoming at last with the effect of naturalness into the talk of men, into the books they read, into their unconsciousgestures, into their newspapers and daily purposes and everyday acts. The broad horizons, the magic possibilitiesthat the spirit of the seeker had revealed to them, were charming them out of those ancient and instinctivepreoccupations from which the very threat of hell and torment had failed to drive them. And this young man,
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
22


homeless and without provision even for the immediate hours, in the presence of social disorganisation, distress,and perplexity, in a blazing wilderness of thoughtless pleasure that blotted out the stars, could think as he tells ushe thought.
'I saw life plain,' he wrote. 'I saw the gigantic task before us, and the very splendour of its intricate andimmeasurable difficulty filled me with exaltation. I saw that we have still to discover government, that we havestill to discover education, which is the necessary reciprocal of government, and that all this−−in which my ownlittle speck of a life was so manifestly overwhelmed−−this and its yesterday in Greece and Rome and Egypt werenothing, the mere first dust swirls of the beginning, the movements and dim murmurings of a sleeper who willpresently be awake....'
### Section 7

And then the story tells, with an engaging simplicity, of his descent from this ecstatic vision of reality.
'Presently I found myself again, and I was beginning to feel cold and a little hungry.'
He bethought himself of the John Burns Relief Offices which stood upon the Thames Embankment. He made hisway through the galleries of the booksellers and the National Gallery, which had been open continuously day andnight to all decently dressed people now for more than twelve years, and across the rose−gardens of TrafalgarSquare, and so by the hotel colonnade to the Embankment. He had long known of these admirable offices, whichhad swept the last beggars and matchsellers and all the casual indigent from the London streets, and he believedthat he would, as a matter of course, be able to procure a ticket for food and a night's lodgings and someindication of possible employment.
But he had not reckoned upon the new labour troubles, and when he got to the Embankment he found the officeshopelessly congested and besieged by a large and rather unruly crowd. He hovered for a time on the outskirts ofthe waiting multitude, perplexed and dismayed, and then he became aware of a movement, a purposive tricklingaway of people, up through the arches of the great buildings that had arisen when all the railway stations wereremoved to the south side of the river, and so to the covered ways of the Strand. And here, in the open glare ofmidnight, he found unemployed men begging, and not only begging, but begging with astonishing assurance,from the people who were emerging from the small theatres and other such places of entertainment whichabounded in that thoroughfare.
This was an altogether unexampled thing. There had been no begging in London streets for a quarter of a century.But that night the police were evidently unwilling or unable to cope with the destitute who were invading thosewell−kept quarters of the town. They had become stonily blind to anything but manifest disorder.
Barnet walked through the crowd, unable to bring himself to ask; indeed his bearing must have been more valiantthan his circumstances, for twice he says that he was begged from. Near the Trafalgar Square gardens, a girl withreddened cheeks and blackened eyebrows, who was walking alone, spoke to him with a peculiar friendliness.
'I'm starving,' he said to her abruptly.
'Oh! poor dear!' she said; and with the impulsive generosity of her kind, glanced round and slipped a silver pieceinto his hand....
It was a gift that, in spite of the precedent of De Quincey, might under the repressive social legislation of thosetimes, have brought Barnet within reach of the prison lash. But he took it, he confesses, and thanked her as well ashe was able, and went off very gladly to get food.
### The World Set Free

### The World Set Free
23


### Section 8

A day or so later−−and again his freedom to go as he pleased upon the roads may be taken as a mark of increasingsocial disorganisation and police embarrassment−−he wandered out into the open country. He speaks of the roadsof that plutocratic age as being 'fenced with barbed wire against unpropertied people,' of the high−walled gardensand trespass warnings that kept him to the dusty narrowness of the public ways. In the air, happy rich people wereflying, heedless of the misfortunes about them, as he himself had been flying two years ago, and along the roadswept the new traffic, light and swift and wonderful. One was rarely out of earshot of its whistles and gongs andsiren cries even in the field paths or over the open downs. The officials of the labour exchanges were everywhereoverworked and infuriated, the casual wards were so crowded that the surplus wanderers slept in ranks undersheds or in the open air, and since giving to wayfarers had been made a punishable offence there was no longerfriendship or help for a man from the rare foot passenger or the wayside cottage....
'I wasn't angry,' said Barnet. 'I saw an immense selfishness, a monstrous disregard for anything but pleasure andpossession in all those people above us, but I saw how inevitable that was, how certainly if the richest hadchanged places with the poorest, that things would have been the same. What else can happen when men usescience and every new thing that science gives, and all their available intelligence and energy to manufacturewealth and appliances, and leave government and education to the rustling traditions of hundreds of years ago?Those traditions come from the dark ages when there was really not enough for every one, when life was a fiercestruggle that might be masked but could not be escaped. Of course this famine grabbing, this fierce dispossessionof others, must follow from such a disharmony between material and training. Of course the rich were vulgar andthe poor grew savage and every added power that came to men made the rich richer and the poor less necessaryand less free. The men I met in the casual wards and the relief offices were all smouldering for revolt, talking ofjustice and injustice and revenge. I saw no hope in that talk, nor in anything but patience....'
But he did not mean a passive patience. He meant that the method of social reconstruction was still a riddle, thatno effectual rearrangement was possible until this riddle in all its tangled aspects was solved. 'I tried to talk tothose discontented men,' he wrote, 'but it was hard for them to see things as I saw them. When I talked of patienceand the larger scheme, they answered, "But then we shall all be dead"−−and I could not make them see, what is sosimple to my own mind, that that did not affect the question. Men who think in lifetimes are of no use tostatesmanship.'
He does not seem to have seen a newspaper during those wanderings, and a chance sight of the transparency of akiosk in the market−place at Bishop's Stortford announcing a 'Grave International Situation' did not excite himvery much. There had been so many grave international situations in recent years.
This time it was talk of the Central European powers suddenly attacking the Slav Confederacy, with France andEngland going to the help of the Slavs.
But the next night he found a tolerable meal awaiting the vagrants in the casual ward, and learnt from theworkhouse master that all serviceable trained men were to be sent back on the morrow to their mobilisationcentres. The country was on the eve of war. He was to go back through London to Surrey. His first feeling, herecords, was one of extreme relief that his days of 'hopeless battering at the underside of civilisation' were at anend. Here was something definite to do, something definitely provided for. But his relief was greatly modifiedwhen he found that the mobilisation arrangements had been made so hastily and carelessly that for nearlythirty−six hours at the improvised depot at Epsom he got nothing either to eat or to drink but a cup of cold water.The depot was absolutely unprovisioned, and no one was free to leave it.
