## CHAPTER THE FOURTH. THE NEW PHASE

### Section 8

As the Brissago council came to realise that what it had supposed to be temporary camps of refugees were rapidlydeveloping into great towns of a new type, and that it was remoulding the world in spite of itself, it decided toplace this work of redistributing the non−agricultural population in the hands of a compactor and better qualifiedspecial committee. That committee is now, far more than the council of any other of its delegated committees, theactive government of the world. Developed from an almost invisible germ of 'town−planning' that came obscurelyinto existence in Europe or America (the question is still in dispute) somewhere in the closing decades of thenineteenth century, its work, the continual active planning and replanning of the world as a place of humanhabitation, is now so to speak the collective material activity of the race. The spontaneous, disorderly spreadingsand recessions of populations, as aimless and mechanical as the trickling of spilt water, which was the substanceof history for endless years, giving rise here to congestions, here to chronic devastating wars, and everywhere to adiscomfort and disorderliness that was at its best only picturesque, is at an end. Men spread now, with the wholepower of the race to aid them, into every available region of the earth. Their cities are no longer tethered torunning water and the proximity of cultivation, their plans are no longer affected by strategic considerations orthoughts of social insecurity. The aeroplane and the nearly costless mobile car have abolished trade routes; acommon language and a universal law have abolished a thousand restraining inconveniences, and so anastonishing dispersal of habitations has begun. One may live anywhere. And so it is that our cities now are truesocial gatherings, each with a character of its own and distinctive interests of its own, and most of them with acommon occupation. They lie out in the former deserts, these long wasted sun−baths of the race, they toweramidst eternal snows, they hide in remote islands, and bask on broad lagoons. For a time the whole tendency ofmankind was to desert the river valleys in which the race had been cradled for half a million years, but now thatthe War against Flies has been waged so successfully that this pestilential branch of life is nearly extinct, they arereturning thither with a renewed appetite for gardens laced by watercourses, for pleasant living amidst islands andhouseboats and bridges, and for nocturnal lanterns reflected by the sea.
Man who is ceasing to be an agricultural animal becomes more and more a builder, a traveller, and a maker. Howmuch he ceases to be a cultivator of the soil the returns of the Redistribution Committee showed. Every year thework of our scientific laboratories increases the productivity and simplifies the labour of those who work upon thesoil, and the food now of the whole world is produced by less than one per cent. of its population, a percentagewhich still tends to decrease. Far fewer people are needed upon the land than training and proclivity disposetowards it, and as a consequence of this excess of human attention, the garden side of life, the creation of grovesand lawns and vast regions of beautiful flowers, has expanded enormously and continues to expand. For, asagricultural method intensifies and the quota is raised, one farm association after another, availing itself of the1975 regulations, elects to produce a public garden and pleasaunce in the place of its former fields, and the area offreedom and beauty is increased. And the chemists' triumphs of synthesis, which could now give us an entirelyartificial food, remain largely in abeyance because it is so much more pleasant and interesting to eat naturalproduce and to grow such things upon the soil. Each year adds to the variety of our fruits and the delightfulness ofour flowers.